# 2. Treasure Hunt

[Sprite wants to draw (Scratch Programming, Class 2) (youtube.com)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgHOtU80kjc&list=PLBfoCkQWTyl2sloD3zvoWtLT4Iiuw4GZM&index=6)

[Gemini Suggestion](2%20Treasure%20Hunt%204e721d8059964cc5ab72319d9cdf0780/Gemini%20Suggestion%20a248907ff39c47ebb49b2f713f0423b5.md)

### Background

### What to Learn

- Use backdrop editor to draw your own backdrop
- Learn to use the various drawing tools
- Create sprites by uploading local images
- Adjust sprite size using the Costume Editor
- Coordinate system ([Understanding X and Y Coordinates on Scratch (youtube.com)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FMxBIRO2VW8))
- Development Mode vs. Execution Mode
- Move sprites using various Motion blocks
- Start program using the Go button
- Pen extension

### Blocks Learnt

- go to
- when flag clicked
- glide to x y
- glide to sprite
- When flag clicked
- Pen up/pen down
- erase all
- set pen color to
- set pen size to

### Lesson Plan

| Step | Details |
| --- | --- |
| Introduction | * Ok, everyone, welcome back to a brand new lesson! Hopefully you all enjoy our Scratch journey so far and can’t wait to discover what else is on the table! In the previously lesson, we have created three pretty cute aliens that can communicate and express themselves in three different ways. We have learnt quite a few Scratch blocks as a result, blocks to get sprites to say something, to make some noise, to switch costumes, to change colors etc. Pretty fun stuffs. But one important thing is still missing: how can we get sprites to move? A sprite just sitting at the same place on the stage forever is not going to make a very exciting animation or game, is it? In this lesson, let’s get our sprites moving! 

*Between the15th and the 17 century, we saw some of the greatest explorers in human history, such as Christopher Columbus and Ferdinand Magellan, sailing large boats to discover new lands and treasure. More importantly, they also plotted maps as they travel. These maps not only helped people at that time to better understand the world but also provide valuable information for all future exploration. 

* Inspired by all these great explorers, we going to build a simple animation project about maritime exploration in this lesson. Let’s first take a look at what the completed project is like. The backdrop this time is the blue ocean. Our explorer with his wooden boat starts here. There are a few scattered islands, some of them have mango trees and coconut trees, which are good waypoints for our explorer to take a rest, get something to eat and plan the next move. But other islands can be dangerous and should be avoided at all costs, such the ones with active volcanos and deadly scorpions. The goal is to eventually reach the island with golden coins, which sits up top. Once we click the green “Go” button, exploration starts! Our boat carefully navigate through the ocean, stopping at the nice islands while avoiding those dangerous ones and finally discovering the treasure chest. As all great explorers did before, we also plotted the route that leads to the treasure. 

* Ok, let’s get started!  |
| Setting up | * Again, the first thing is always to go to the CCW website and log on. Then click “Create New Project” under “Go Create”. Once again, this opens up an empty project in the Gandi IDE. Like the last project, we need to do three things, first go to the Settings and change the stage to 4:3, then delete the default sprite and finally, change the name of the project to “Lesson 2 - Treasure Hunt”. Ok, these are the steps we are going to do for pretty much all of our projects. So in the future, to save us some time, I’m just going to skip this part and assume that you can set everything up yourself. Ok, all good?  |
| Draw backdrop - Introduction | * Right, we starts from a blank sheet. Let’s first get some backdrop for our project. In previous lessons, we chose backdrops from the backdrop library. There are a lot of images there for us to use. But in this lesson, I want to unleash your creativity and teach you how to draw your own backdrop. And part of the fun of coding in Scratch is that, you can create and use your own drawings for either backdrops or sprites. I have seen some students who are very good at this! Learning how to use some of the most common drawing tools in Scratch can be pretty useful at times. 

* OK, we now have the empty backdrop selected and let’s click the “Backdrops” tab. This brings us to the Backdrop editor, we have met this before. Now, instead of going to the big plus button and select “Choose a Backdrop”, we will be drawing our own image on this big empty canvas here.

* First, take a look at the canvas. You should see two rectangle areas, a small brighter one inside and a big darker one outside. This smaller rectangle has the same size as our stage, meaning anything you draw within its boundary is going to be shown on the stage, whereas anything outside is not visible. If you want to make the canvas bigger to better see what’s on there, you can click the plus button here to make it bigger. To shrink it back down, click this minus button instead. The equal button just makes the canvas fit on to the screen. 

* Ok, let’s move to this part on the left. This is call the “tool box”. There are a total of nine icons and each one is a different drawing tool. If you not sure what each one does, simply hover your mouse over, it’s going to show you some useful tooltip. For example, if I hover my mouse over this mouse pointer icon, it says “Select” and if I hover over this square icon it says “Rectangle”. You can try after class to see what each tool is. 

* Now, let’s select the “Rectangle” tool by clicking its icon. Once a tool is selected, it is highlighted now in blue. Can you guess what this tool is used for? Yes, it’s used to draw a rectangle! Now, move your mouse anywhere on the canvas, click and hold down your mouse, then just drag it out. Now, a rectangle is drawn, as simple as that. Before you let go off the mouse, you can change its size anyway you want. I can make it taller, wider or maybe even a square. Once you release the mouse, it is done! Now, If you click the “Code” tab to go back to the main editor, you can see that our stage becomes has a white background with a purple rectangle! Exactly what we have created so far! Cool! 

* Now, back to the backdrop editor. If you are not happy with the position of the rectangle, you can move it around. To do that, you first need to select this rectangle. Remember, we are still having the “Rectangle” tool currently. If you click and drag anywhere on the canvas, it is just going to draw another rectangle. To select and move the rectangle around, we first need to change to the “Select” tool by clicking this mouse pointer icon here. Now, you can click and select the purple rectangle on the canvas. You can tell something is selected if it has a blue outline with some dots and a double headed arrow. I will example what they are for later on. But now, since the rectangle is selected, you can click, hold the mouse and move it around. Once you are happy with the new position, just let go off the mouse. 

* OK, what are the blue dots used for? Well, they are used for resizing the rectangle. For example, if you hover your mouse over the dot on the left edge, you can see a double headed arrow pointing left and right, this means you can click and drag the mouse left and right. Let’s try that. See? As I move left or right, the rectangle’s size changes, it becomes wider or narrower. Similarly for the dot at the top, this time, we see a double headed arrow points up and down, this means you can click and drag the mouse up and down. Let’s try that. See? As I move up or down, the rectangle becomes taller or shorter. How about the dots at the corners. Let’s try again. Aha, this one is used to change both the width and the height at the same time. Cool! Finally, how about the double headed arrow at the bottom? If you click and drag it, the rectangle rotates, it’s for rotating a shape! Pretty neat!  |
| Draw backdrop - Ocean | * Now we know how to draw a shape, we are ready to take the first step towards creating our ocean backdrop! Delete the purple rectangle first. You can select it and the press the “delete” button on your keyboard. Phew, it’s gone. Ok, ocean is blue, I think everybody agrees with that, right? This means we first need to change the background of the canvas to a blueish color. Unfortunately, there is no magical button that you can just click and change the background color. But what did we just learn to draw? Yes, a rectangle! So what if we can just draw a very big blue rectangle that covers the entire stage? Would that just make the entire background blue? Let’s try! Choose the rectangle tool again. This time, because we want it to be big enough to cover the stage, I’m going to start from the upper left corner, just outside of the stage, click and drag all the way to the lower right corner, again, just outside of the stage, then let go of the mouse. Bang! We have a big purple rectangle! Now, let’s go back to the main editor and see what the stage looks like now! Ah, yes, it’s all covered in purple now! Cool! 

* But there is problem, the ocean should not be purple, we need to change the color! But how? Well, first, very important, because we are going to change the color of the rectangle, we need to make sure the rectangle is selected. Choose the “Select” tool again and select the purple rectangle. Next, take a look at the area above the canvas, there are buttons and icons used for many different things. The one to change color is this “Fill” here. if you click it, a small window appears and this is where you create the color you want. 

* First, we can see four sliders: Color, Saturation, Brightness and Opacity. Let’s take a look at them one by one. “Color” is, well, what the color is! If you move the slider around, you can see the color of our rectangle changes. Also, there is a number for each color. For the ocean I want to pick a blueish color. I think this one looks good, the color number is 50. Next, we have the “Saturation” slider. What does “saturation” mean? It means how intense the color is. For example, if I drag the slider all the way to the right, that is 100% saturation, it becomes very blue. On the other hand, if I drag it towards left, it gets less and less blue until it is completely white again, at 0%. Of course, I don’t want a white background, so let me move it back to the right, and I think here, about 90% looks good. Right, next, the “Brightness”. Well, as the name suggests, it controls how bright the color is. Currently it’s at 100%, so pretty bright. If I move it to the left, it gets darker and darker, until it becomes completely black at 0%. Here, I don’t want 100% brightness, so let’s me turn it down a bit, I think 90% looks good. Finally the “Opacity” controls how opaque the color is. At 100%, it is completely opaque, meaning you cannot see through it. If you move the slider left, it becomes more and more transparent, until the color is completely invisible at 0%. I do not want any transparency here, so let me put it back to 100%. Now there are a few more buttons below, but I will just skip them for now since they are not used here. With these four sliders, you can pretty much create any color you need! Play with them after class and see what you can get! |
| Draw backdrop - Islands | * Ok, it’s time to add some islands. Here is what the final map looks like. As you can see, the islands are not of any regular shapes such rectangles or circles. They look pretty irregular. How on earth do you create such shapes? Surprisingly, this is as simple as playing with plasticene! Let me show you how. Let’s create one island first. Choose the rectangle tool and draw a small rectangle on the canvas. Now, obviously we don’t want a purple island. Let’s change its color. Choose the select tool and select the island. Open the “Fill” window to set the color. For an island, I want the color to be brownish. So move the color slider to about 6ish. I think the color is a bit too intense now, it actually looks like orange. So let’s lower the saturation to about 50. I think the color looks good now. Of course, you don’t have to stick with these numbers, change them to whatever you want. There is another thing I want change. All the rectangles we created so far have this black outline. It’s ok for the ocean since we are not seeing it on the stage anyway. But for the island, I don’t want have have the black outline. Getting rid of it is super simple. Again, select island first, then next to “Fill” there is a “Outline” option. Click it and this opens up another window for setting up the outline. So we have seen the same four sliders here, meaning you can also change the color of an outline. But that’s not what we want here, we want to remove it completely. To do that, simple click this button at the bottom with a red diagonal lines. Now, take a look at the island again. See? No more outline, cool!

* Ok, I know you might be saying “but this looks nothing like an island! How can an island be a rectangle!” Yes, you are absolutely right, I don’t think there will ever be a perfect rectangle island! That’s why I’m going to introduce the next magical tool called “Reshape”, it’s this icon here. Click and select it. Now, let me first make the canvas and the island bigger so that I can see better. Notice that, once this tool is selected, the rectangle has only four dots at its four corners. Now, click anyone of those dots and hold your mouse down. Try dragging it along and see what happen? Aha, we can change the rectangle to some irregular shape! And you can do this for any of the four dots. Pretty interesting! But you might say again “OK, that’s good, but each side of the shape is still straight line and this still looks nothing like an island. An island should have curves!” Aha, yes, curves, very important! But you know what, the reshape tool can help you to create curves as well! Let me show you how! 

* Now, you can click anywhere on a straight line, and see, this adds a new point. We often call this an “anchor” point. Now, watch, if I click and drag this anchor point, aha, see, the straight line has become a curve! Awesome! Also notice that there are two small handles sticking out from the anchor point. You can click and drag either one of them, and see, this would allow you to change the curve! Now you can add more anchor points on this curve as well. And they can be dragged around to create any irregular shapes! So that’s it! All you need to do is just to add those anchor points on the outline of the shape and drag them around. There is not right answer here, feel free to create any shape you like! So for example, I have created something like this, which I think kind of looks like an island. Cool. So one done, and four more to go. You can just follow the same steps, create a rectangle first, set the right color, remove the outline and use the “Reshape” tool to turn it into an island shape! Ok, let’s have a 5 minute break and I will let you finish the other four. Off you go! 

* Right, time’s up! Everybody finished all your islands? Yeah? Good! Here is what mine looks like.  |
| Backdrop - Waves | * Ok, our ocean backdrop is almost done. But to make it look even better, I want to add some waves. To  draw waves we can use this “Brush” tool here. Once it is selected, let’s pick a color for it. Again, in the Fill window, I want to pick a deeper blue color. For the Color slider, I think somewhere around 55 looks good. I think the saturation looks good. But for brightness, I want to make it a little bit dark, I think somewhere around 80% looks good. 

* Ok, once the color is picked, it’s time to draw. This is actually pretty simple: on the canvas, press and hold the mouse down, and just draw a squiggly line anyway you want. And this is it, we have our first wave! Of course, one is not enough, let’s just draw more in the ocean. One here, one there, it doesn’t have to be perfect, what is a perfect wave after all? OK, once this is done, our backdrop looks more like ocean now. Cool!  It is finally done and we are ready to add sprites! |
| Treasure Chest | * Ok, as you have seen from the beginning of this lesson, the project has quite a few sprites: there is the boat, the treasure chest, trees, volcano and scorpion. Let’s add them one at a time. The order in which you add the sprite isn’t that important here, so I will just start with our goal: the treasure chest. 

* Since there is no treasure chest in the Scratch sprite library, I’m just going to use one I prepared myself. Now, in the last lesson, we have seen how you could upload one of your own images for backdrops. To use your own images for sprites is equally easy. Make sure you are back to the main editor. In the lower right corner, hover your mouse over the big plus button to bring up the menu. Previously, we always select the “Choose a Sprite” option to select sprites from the library. This time, take a look at the first option that says “Upload Sprite”. In the case of backdrop, we have see a similar option that says “Upload backdrop”, and this one is similar. Click it and it opens up the file explorer again. Now, like how we found our backdrop image in the last lesson, we need to find our Treasure Chest image this time. 

* First, find the folder “Scratch for Newbies” for this entire course. Open it, and go to “Level1”. Then open folder “Lesson 2 - Treasure Hunt”. Then we see the three pretty familiar folders: Code, Notes and Resources. Like in the last lesson, all images we used for backdrops or sprites are going to be stored in the “Resources” folder, so open that up. Now, instead of a backdrop folder, we see a Sprites folder this time. Open that up. Now, we have finally arrived at all the sprite images for this lesson! There are a total of 6, and we will use all of them in the project. But for now, the one we are looking for is this “Treasure Hunt” image. To upload it to our project, simply double click this image. Bang! There you go! We have a new sprite named “Treasure Chest” and it is on the stage now! 

* But there is a small problem: this sprite is way too big! We need to shrink it down so that we can place it on one of our islands! Now there are at least two different ways to make a sprite smaller. I’m going to teach one of the methods and we will learn the other one later in the course. Now, this sprite looks too big because its costume is too big. Remember, a costume of a sprite is just something that gives it its look. Still remember how to see all the costumes of a sprite? Yes, we can click this “Costumes” tab and go to the Costume Editor. Now, here is something I want you to know. When you upload an image and then open the Costume Editor, if you see this button that says “Convert to Vector”, then you should do it. This is because, images in Scratch can be in either pixel form or vector form. Now, you don’t need to know what they mean, you just need to understand in this course, we always work with vector images whenever possible. So when you see this button, click to convert our image from pixel form to vector form. Once you do that, the button changes to “Convert to Bitmap”, which simply converts the image back to pixel form. Of course, we don’t want to do that here. 

* Now, as we can see on the canvas, the treasure chest is indeed too big, it’s as tall as the entire stage! We need to make it smaller. Now, when we drew our own backdrop, we have learnt how to make a rectangle smaller by dragging on of those corner points. And it is not very different here. First, make sure you have chosen the Select tool from the tool box. Then click and select the treasure box. Now we can see the outline with the eight anchor points. So to make costume smaller, simple click any of the four points and drag it. See? The image is now becoming much smaller. Now, to check if the size ok, click the “Code” tab to go back to the main editor. Take a look at the stage, and I think it is still too big, so go back to the Costume editor and make it even smaller. Now, it’s looking good. Cool. One thing you might notice is that, the Treasure Chest costume is currently not at the center of the canvas. Usually, we would like the image to be right as the center. So let’s select the costume again, drag and move it towards the center. Now, when you drag it, you would notice that there is a blue cross right at the center of the costume. Also, there is something like a target at the center of the canvas. Now, to place the costume exactly at the center of the canvas, you need to match these two. But it is not as hard as it sounds, because, once the costume is moved closed enough to the target, you can just let go off the mouse, and the costume would just snap exactly right to the target. Now, the costume is exactly at the center of the canvas. Nice!

* Once, the treasure chest is added, it’s size has been adjusted, now we just need to place it at one of those islands. I would like to move it to the one in the upper left corner. Ok, now, I want you to pay attention to these x and y values in the sprite’s property panel. We have met them in our very first lesson. I said back then that these numbers have to do with the position of a sprite on the stage. As I move the treasure chest, you can clearly see that their values change. But what I have not explained is what these numbers really mean. Earlier, I promised that we would get to the bottom of it. And now is the time. Let’s take a small detour and try to understand the “Coordinate System” in Scratch. |
| Coordinate System | * Please don’t the name fool you and think that this is some very complex, it is not. Actually, we use some kind of coordinate system in a lot of places to help use find things more easily. For example, let’s say you bought a ticket to watch a film at a cinema. Now, how do you know where your seat is? Anyone? Yes, usually on the ticket, it would say something like row 5 and column 16. What does that mean? Well, all seats in the cinema are arranged into rows and columns, like this. For example, I have 6 rows and 6 columns of seats here. Now, if your ticket says the seat is at row 3 and column 2, where do you think it is? Well, first, we need to number each row and each column. For the rows, we number them 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, from front to back. For the columns, we also number them 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, from left to right. Now, again, where is our seat at row 3 and column 2? Aha, with all these row and column numbers, we can very quickly find out that the seat is right here!  And guess what? With these row and column numbers, we are actually having a Coordinate System! And you can find many similar examples in everyday life, it is everywhere!

* Right, back to Scratch. As we have seen, you can drag and place a sprite anywhere on the stage. So we also need a coordinate system to tell us where exactly a sprite is at any point in time. Now, you can also think of the entire stage as having many rows and columns of seats. But instead of just having 5 rows and 5 columns as in our little cinema example, Scratch stage actually has 360 rows and 480 columns, with a total of 360x480 = 172800 seats! Given a row number and a column number, we can quickly locate any seat on the stage. In Scratch, we use “y” to represent the row number and “x” to represent the column number. 

* Ok, to make the whole thing clearer, let’s switch the backdrop to a different one. Select the backdrop, click the “Backdrops” tab to going to the Backdrop editor. Currently, we just have one backdrop drawn by ourselves in the backdrop list. Let’s add a special one. Go to the plus button and select “Choose a Backdrop”. In the backdrop library, type in “grid” in the search box, in the results that come up, select the first one named “yx-grid”. Now, this backdrop is added to the list and is currently selected. Now, go back to the main editor and you can see that the stage has been change to this xy-grid backdrop. So we can see two straight lines here, one horizontal and one vertical. The horizontal one is called the “x-axis” and is used to mark the column number; the vertical one is called the “y-axis” and is used to mark the row number. Now, since I said that the stage has 360 rows and 480 columns, you might then think that the 
the row number or the y value starts at 1 at the left side of the stage and goes all the way to 480. Similarly, the column number or the x value starts at 1 at the top of the stage and goes all the way to 360. Well, this is not too far off, but there is an important difference comparing to our seat analogy, in Scratch stage, the center of the stage has row number 0 and column number 0, or x 0 and y 0. And that’s what this (x:0, y:0) in the backdrop really means. Now, if you move up from the center along the y axis, the row number, or the y value goes from 0 all the way to 180. Because it is now only half of the stage height, so 360/2 is 180. That’s why at the top of the stage, we see something like “(x:0, y:180)”. This means we are at the seat row number is 180 and whose column number is 0. What about going down then? Well, the row number then goes from 0 to -180. And at the end, we have “(x:0, y:-180)”. What is -180? What does it mean for a row number to be -180.

* Well, to understand that, we first need to introduced the concept of “Positive number” and “Negative number”. Ok, some of you might be scratching your head and say, “What the hell is that!” Well, even if you have never heard of positive and negative numbers, don’t worry, it’s actually not very difficult to understand. In geography, we often use sea level as a reference point for how high things are. For example, the mount Everest is 8848 meters above sea level. In other words, the distance between the top of the mountain and the sea surface is 8848 meters. Say you have built a magical vehicle that can both fly in air and dive in the ocean. When you fly, as you go higher and higher, the distance between you and the sea surface goes from 0 meter to 1 meter to 2 meter, to 10 meters, to 100 meters so on and so forth. The higher you fly, the bigger the numbers get and these numbers are called “Positive Numbers”. On the other hand, when you dive in the ocean, as you go deeper and deeper, the distance between you and the sea surface also goes from 0 meter to 1 meter to 2 meter, to 10 meters, to 100 meters so and so forth. However, because we are travelling in the opposite direction, they are called “Negative numbers” this time to simply mean they go in the opposite direction of the Positive numbers. To differentiate between the two types of numbers, we add a minus sign in front of all negative numbers. So the numbers becomes -1, -2, -10 an -100. 

* Ok, hopefully, this example makes it clear for you what positive and negative numbers are. Now, back to Scratch, you can think of the x axis as the sea level, as we move up, the height goes from 0 to 180. Similarly, as we move down, the depth also goes from 0 to 180, but because it is the opposite direction of going up, so we add a minus sign to make them all negative numbers. Now going left or right along the X axis is similar. If you move right from the center, the column number, or the x value goes from 0 all the way to 240. Because it is now only half of the stage width, so 480/2 is 240. That’s why at the right side of the stage, we see something like “(x:240, y:0)”. This means we are at the seat whose row number is 0 and whose column number is 240. What about going left? Yes, because it’s in the opposite direction, the column number  goes from 0 to -240. And at the left side, we have “(x:-240, y:0)”. 

* So that’s it! That’s what the Scratch coordinate system is all about! Just think of it as a giant cinema with seats arranged in 360 rows and 480 columns. You can work out the exact location of a sprite by simply out the row number and column number of the seat it is currently occupying. The only difference you need to be aware of in Scratch is that the center seat has row number 0 and column number 0. The row number becomes positive when moving up and negative when moving down. Similarly, the column number becomes positive when moving right and negative when moving left. Ok, we no longer need this xy-grid backdrop anymore, let’s go to the Backdrop editor and delete it from the list. This switch our backdrop back to the ocean.   |
| Treasure Chest | * Ok, let’s return from the detour and get back to our main track. Where were we? Ah, yes, we were trying to place the treasure chest at one of islands. Now, with our new knowledge of the coordinate system, we can better understand what its x and y numbers really mean. So the treasure chest is currently at row number 140 and column number -170 on the stage. And this is where we want it to be. Cool.  |
| Boat | * Ok, the treasure is there, it’s time to add our great explorer to find it! This means we need another sprite! Now again, since there isn’t a suitable boat sprite in the Scratch sprite library, I’m going to use one of my own, just like what we did for the treasure chest. Let’s go through the steps of uploading a sprite again!

* Hover your mouse over the big plus button to bring up the menu again. Choose the “Upload Sprite” option to bring up the Windows File Explorer. Now, unlike before when we have to go from folder to folder to find the treasure chest image, this time, since we have done this before, File Explorer remembers where we were last time, so it opens the “Sprite” folder for this lesson directly. That’s super neat! Ok, we can now see an image called “Boat”, just double click it to add it to our project. Right, it’s been added to the stage!

* But we have the same problem as before: the sprite is way too big! But no big deal, we already know who to handle this, right? Let’s click the “Costumes” tab to open the Costume editor. As we can see on the canvas, the boat costume is taking up the entire stage. No wonder why it looks so big! But before we can shrink it down, do you still remember what we need to do first? Yes! We need to click this “Convert to Vector” button at the bottom to convert the boat image into its vector form. Again, you don’t need to understand why in this course, just make sure you do it every time. 

* OK, once it’s been converted, making the image smaller is pretty easy. First, choose the Select tool. Then click the boat on the canvas to bring up the blue outline. Then just click and drag any one of it’s four corners to resize the image. So we can make it way smaller. But after that, the boat image is no longer at the center of the canvas. As I said before, we normal want the costume to be at the center where there is a little target. So click and drag the boat towards the target, and once it is close enough, just let go off the mouse, the costume would then snap right to the target. Now it is exactly at the center of the canvas, cool! Now, let’s get back to the main editor by clicking the “Code” tab, and as you can see, the boat has the right size now! If you find that the boat is either still too big or too small, just go back to the Costume Editor and repeat those steps until your boat’s size looks right. We are just lucky in getting it right in one go.

* Ok, we now want to place the boat at its starting position. We want it to start somewhere in the lower right corner. So let’s drag and move it there. Again, as you move it, its x and y coordinates change. The final starting position is at x 180 and y -120.  |
| Add four islands | * OK, let’s next turn our attention to the remaining four islands. Some of the islands can be a stop over for our boat to get some supplies, such as fruits, whereas others are an absolute no no because they are just too dangerous. If you open the “Sprites” folder of this lesson, apart from the treasure chest and boat images that we have already used, you would see four more images, coconut tree, mango tree, scorpion and volcano. We are going to place them on the four remaining islands. So pretty obviously, we can stop at the coconut tree or mango tree islands, but avoid the scorpion and volcano islands at all costs. Let’s do that! 

*  Go back to Gandi IDE. Let’s just quickly repeat the same process to add four more sprites … Ok, as you can see, each new sprite is too big. So let’s make them smaller one by one… Ok, the four sprites all have the right size. Let’s move each of them to their own island. Ok, all looks good. Of course, you can choose any images you like and you can place them onto the islands any way you want. Totally up to you!  |
| Move boat using “go to x y” block | * Ok, all the sprites are ready. It’s time to hunt down the treasure by moving our boat from island to island! Based on the ocean map, it’s pretty obvious that we want to go the mango tree island first, and then the coconut tree island before finally reaching the treasure chest. We never want to go anywhere near the volcano island or the scorpion island. Ok, time to get the boat moving! 

* So far, the way we move a sprite is by dragging it to the location we want. But there is problem and let me explain. A scratch editor, whether it’s Gandi IDE or anything else, gives you two modes. One is called the “Development mode”, which is the one we have been seeing so far. It’s called “Development Mode” because, in this mode, you can write code, drag sprites anywhere on the stage, change a sprite’s properties, etc. For example, I can drag the boat to the lower left corner instead. In this mode, you are “developing” your project to get it ready. Now, once the animation or game you are developing is ready, you no longer want to mess around with the code or the sprites. What you want to do now is to run or execute your project so that the animation or the game can be played. This is called the “Execution Mode” in which you can only watch the animation or play the game, but never change the code or the properties of sprites anymore. So, how do we go from the current “Development Mode” into “Execution Mode”? Simple, can you see this button above the stage, if you hover your mouse over, the tool tip says “Full Screen Control”. If you click it, everything, except the stage is gone! And you are in “Execution Mode” now! Here, you can no longer drag and move any sprite! See, I can no longer drag the boat any more! Also, since everything else in the editor is gone, I can not change the code, cannot change the sprites, cannot change the backdrops, there is nothing I can do except watching the animation! Of course, we don’t have an animation yet, but you get the idea. So, if we can’t drag and move a sprite in execution mode, what can we do to move our boat to the mango tree island? Well, just because you can’t do it, does not mean you can’t ask the boat to do it itself! And how do we ask a sprite to do anything? Yes, we use code blocks! Just like in the last lesson, we use code blocks to ask Pico to say something, we can use code blocks to ask the boat to move as well! Let’s see how this can be done! 

* Of course, since we are still in the Execution Mode, there is no way for us to add any code blocks. To go back to the “Development Mode”, simple click this icon again, and this brings us back to the main editor. Here, we can drag and move the boat sprite again. But of course, this is not the way we want to move it. We are going to use code blocks!

* Again, whenever you want to find a code block, first think about the category it might belong to. Asking a sprite to move clearly does not belong to the Looks category. Because, well, the “Looks” category has all the blocks for changing how the sprite looks. What category do you think we should take a look? “Sounds”? No! Aha, yes, the “Motion” category. “Motion” simply means movement, sounds promising! If you click it, you can see all the blue code blocks that are related to movement. We are going to introduce and use most of them in this and future lessons. For now, which block do you think can help us to move our boat to the mango tree island?

* “move”? Maybe! Anything else? “go to”? Looks promising! Let’s take a look at the “go to” block. This block has two slots where you can type in numbers. One is called “x” and the other one called “y”. What do you think these two numbers are used for? Ok, every time you go somewhere, the first thing you need to know is where that somewhere is, right? And we already know that Scratch uses a coordinate system to determine every location on the stage using a pair of x and y coordinates. So let me ask the same question again: what do you think these two numbers in the “go to” block are used for? Yes, they are used to identify the location you want the sprite to go to! For example, if I want the boat to go to the center of the stage, what numbers should I put in here? Yes, 0 and 0 because we know that the x and y coordinates of the center are both 0s. If we do that and click this block to run it, aha, you can see that the boat goes to the center! But of course, this is not where we want to the boat to go, instead, we want it to go to the mango tree island first. So, let’s drag the boat back to its starting position. 

* So what we need to do next is to figure out what are the coordinates of the mango tree island so that we can use them in the “go to” block. This is easy, on the mango tree island, there is a mango tree sprite, right? All we need to do is just to make the boat go to where the mango tree is. Do we know where the mango tree is? Or do we know the coordinates of the mango tree? Of course, we do! How do find that out? Yeah, just click and choose the mango tree sprite, and in its properties panel, we can see that its x coordinate is 70, and y coordinate -90. This is where the mango tree currently is. So to move the boat to the mango tree island, we can just make it go to this coordinate. So click and get back to the boat sprite, in the “go to” block, type in 70 as the x coordinate and -90 as the y coordinate. Now, click and run the block again, this time, the boat goes straight to the mango tree island! Awesome! We can drag the boat back to its starting position, and click the “go to” block, it then goes to the exact location where the mango tree is again! Nice! Ok, this is all good in the development mode. What would happen if, say we are happy with the code, and want to run it in execution mode? Let’s try!

* Click this full screen button to go into execution mode. Aha, we have a problem! Can anyone see that? How did we make the boat move previously? Yes, we simply click and run the “go to” block in the script area. But can we do that now? No, we can’t! Why? because there is no block for us to click! Everything is hidden except the stage itself! So in this case, how can we run the code and start the animation? Hmmmm…..

* So far, we have already seen two different ways to run Scratch code, the first one is simply clicking the code block or the script you want to run, such as clicking this “go to” block here. The second one is to use a hat block “when this sprite is clicked” so that when a sprite is click, the script that starts with this hat block is run. When have seen this in the previous lesson. Now, I would like to introduce the third way, and this is probably the most important and used method to run code in Scratch. When we introduced the Gandi IDE in the very first lesson, I briefly mentioned about this green “Go” button above the stage. And I said it was used to start running your project. Now, it’s time to properly understand what it does!

* If you want to single sentence to summarize what it does, it is this: when this button is clicked, Scratch would run certain blocks or scripts in all sprites. OK, here are the important things about this sentence, first, Scratch is only going to run certain blocks or scripts. What does that mean? What are those “certain blocks or scripts”? Good question, we will come back to that later. The next important thing is that Scratch is going to run all those “certain” blocks or scripts in all sprites. This is an important way to start running all sprites together! You will see what this means later on. 

* Now, let’s get back to the question of what are those “certain” blocks or scripts that get run when the “Go” button is clicked. Let’s first try to click it now and see what would happen. Click, click, click, and nothing happens. The boat stays at where it was and the go to block was not run. Hmmm…something must be missing. Ok, let’s think about what we did in the last lesson for all three sprites to run their scripts. We used a hat block called “When this sprite clicked” from the “Events” category as the first block for all their scripts. This way, whenever a sprite is clicked, it runs all the blocks that follow this hat block. That’s all good. But here, we are not going to let the boat moves to mango island when it is clicked. Instead, we want it to move when the green “go” button is clicked. Ideally, instead of a hat block that says “when this sprite clicked”, we want a hat block that says “when the go button clicked”. But is there such a block? Let’s find out! Where do you think we can most likely find such a block if there is any? Yes, in the “Events” category! Let’s go there! Aha, do you the first hat block there? What does does it say? It says “When flag clicked”? And what do you think this green flag stands for? Yes, this green flag here is the same as the go button! So this is essentially the same as “when go button clicked”, exactly what we need! Let’s drag it out! Now, what do you think we should do? Yes, we should then connect the “go to” block to this “when flag clicked” block, just like what we did in the last lesson for the “when sprite clicked” hat block. So when the flag or the go button is click, it should then run the code that follows, which is just this “go to” block. Let’s try again this time! Click the Go button and there you go, the boat moves to the mango island! Awesome! If we move it back, and click the Go button again, it moves the mango island again! Nice! Now, we can answer the question of what those “certain” blocks or scripts that get run when the go button clicks: they are any blocks or scripts that start with the “When flag clicked” hat block. When the go button is clicked, any such scripts in all sprites are going to be run. But if blocks or scripts that do not start with this hat block won’t be run. Simple as that! This hat block is probably one of the most important and commonly used block in Scratch and you will be seeing it a lot in this course.

* Now, in the development mode, we have two ways to run this script: we can still choose to click the entire script to run it, as you can see. Or, we can click the Go button to run it as I have just shown you. But now, if we go into the full screen execution mode, then your only option to run the script is by clicking the Go button. 

* Ok, that boat arrive at mango tree island, what is the next one it should sail to? Yes, the coconut tree island. How can we get it there? Simple, just add another “go to” block after the first one, and use the coconut tree’s x and y coordinates for the two slots. What are the coconut tree’s x and y coordinates, well, just click the coconut tree sprite, take a look at its properties panel, and we can see that the coordinates are x -140 and y -90. Then go back to the Boat sprite and type those numbers in, -140, and -90. Ok, with this script, when the go button is clicked, the boat should first go to mango island, then go to coconut island. Let’s see if this is the case. First, move the boat back to its starting position. Now, click the “Go” button and …. hmmm….it seems that the boat goes straight to coconut island without stopping at the mango island! What is going on here? Anyone?

* Ok, in the last lesson, we made Nano express Thank You by lifting its arms and then put them back down. We did this by first switching its costume to the one with both arms up and then switch it back to the one with both arms down. But if you still remembered, we were having a small issue before. When you simply switch its costumes one after the other, the end result is that we do not see Nano lifting its arms at all. Still remember that? Good! And now can you recall what actually caused that problem? Anyone? Yes, it’s because Scratch can run scripts really fast, so fast that our human eye cannot even notice the costume switch. Ok, if you still understand that problem, can you figure out why we are not seeing the boat stopping at mango island here? Yes, the same reason, Scratch runs the script too fast. Actually, the boat did go to mango island first, and then go to the coconut island. But because everything is happening so fast, we do not see the stopover. All we see is that the boat ended up on coconut island. Ok, if we really want to see the boat go to mango island first, and then coconut island, what should we do? Yes, we can borrow the solution from the last lesson! If this is because things are running too fast, then we can just slow it down. How do we slow things down in Scratch? Yes, we use the “wait seconds” block in the “Events” category! Let’s drag that out. And where do you think we should put this code block? Yes, we should put it after the first go to, when the boat is at mango island. So we make it wait for one second before it sets off again for the coconut island. Let’s drag the boat back to the starting position again. Click the Go button, and there you go, we can now clearly see that the boat first goes to mango island, stay there for one second and then moving on to the coconut island! Very Cool! 

* Ok, before we move on, I want to address a small problem. Right now, each time after running the program, the boat ends up on the coconut tree island. So to run it again, we have to drag and move it back to its starting position before clicking the “Go” button. This is a little bit inconvienent. Ideally, we want the boat to automatically start at the lower right corner each time we run the program. How can we do that? Any idea? Now since we already know how to make a sprite go anywhere on the stage, can we make the boat go to its starting position when the Go button is clicked, before anything else? Sure we can. Let’s add yet another “go to”, we are going to use that to place the boat at the lower right corner when the Go button is clicked. So first, where should we put this block? Any idea? Yes, this should the be very first thing we do when the go button is clicked, meaning we need to add it right after the “when flag clicked” hat block. Next, what are the x and y coordinates to use here? Well, you can use any as long as its a position some where in the lower right corner of the stage. For example, here, where x is 180 and y is -120. OK, with these two numbers, you can type them in to this new “go to” block. That’s one way. But there is a better way. Take a look at the x and y numbers of the “go to” block in the “Motion” category, do you notice something? Yes, the numbers there are exactly 180 and -120. Now, if I move the boat again to a slightly different position, for example, x 182 and y -125. Then take a look, the numbers automatically change to 182 and -125. So after moving the boat to where you want it to start, instead of typing its current x and y coordinates into the “go to” block, you can just drag out a new “go to” block and it already has the right x and y coordinate in its slots. So, let’s delete the previous one, and place this new one in. Cool. 

* Test. Let’s run the code and see what it looks like now. The first time the program stops, the boat is at coconut island. If we run it again, it should then go back to the lower right corner and start from there again. Let’s try. Hmmm….looks like it always start from the mango island instead! It never goes back to its starting position. What has gone wrong? Any idea? Yes, very good! This is again caused by the fact that Scratch runs the code too fast. When the Go button is clicked, the boat did go to the lower right corner first, but then, very quickly, it went to the mango island. This happened so fast that, to our human eyes, it appears as if the boat always starts from the mango island. By now, hopefully you should know what the solution is, right? Yes, we just need to wait for bit after the boat goes to its starting position. So let’s also add a wait block here, to wait for one second. Let’s try again. Aha, yes, we can now clearly see the boat start at the lower right corner, then goes to mango island and finally ends up on the coconut island. Very cool!

* All right, we are getting closer and closer to the treasure! Exciting! Now, I want you to be the captain. Let’s have a few minutes and see if you can finally sail the boat to the treasure! Off you go! Ok, times up, everyone find the treasure? Yeah? Awesome! So while you guys are do it, I have also managed to do it! This is as simple as finding the coordinates of the treasure chest and them those two numbers in a new  “go to” block added at the end of the script. Also, remember to wait for one second after the boat arrives at the coconut island. If we run the program now, the boat hops from island to island and eventually reaching the treasure. Now, everybody should be singing and dancing! Hooray! |
| Move boat using “glide to x y” | * OK, this all looks good! But before we move on, let me ask you a question: does the way our boat moves looks like it is sailing in the ocean? So it starts here, then all of sudden it appears at the mango island, one second later, it again instantly appears at the coconut island, and one more second later, it once again instantly appears at the treasure. To me, this looks more like teleportation than sailing! Do you think so? Yeah? Don’t get me wrong, teleportation is cool, and I would be dreaming to have that super power! But for our animation here, since it is not a science fiction, we want it to look as realistic as possible. How should the boat move to look more realistic? Yes, it should glide slowly from island to island! Unfortunately, with the “go to” block, a sprite always moves instantly from one place to another.

* Hmmm…so we want a sprite to “glide”…would be nice if there is a block that can make a sprite “glide”! Maybe there is one! Can you find it? Yes, there are two blocks in the “Motion” category that start with the word “glide”. One looks similar to the “go to” block with two slots for the x and y coordinates. Let’s drag that out and take a closer look. The x and y coordinates, just like the “go to” block, tells the sprite where to glide to. But unlike the “go to” block, it has a third slot for entering some time in seconds. This will be the time it take for the sprite to glide to the final destination. If the destination is the same, the longer the time, the slower the sprite glides and vice versa. For example, let’s move the boat to the lower right corner, and pass 0 to both x and y to glide it to the center of the stage. Now, click and run it. You can see the boat glides to the center, as expected. Now, if we move the boat back and change the time to 3 seconds and run it again, this time, you can see that the gliding speed becomes much slower, because it is taking 3 times as long to get to the center. 

* Ok, that’s how glide works! How can we use this block in our script then? Simple, since we want our boat to glide instead of teleporting, we just need to replace all the “go to” blocks with this new “glide block”. Of course, we still need the same x and y coordinate in each of the “go to” block. So let’s do that! Ok, all done, all the “go to” blocks have been replace by “glide” blocks with the correct coordinates. Let’s test this out!

* Test. Ok, yeah, this looks so much better. Now instead of being teleported from island to island, our boat actually sails through them slowly, which looks a lot more realistic. Of course, you can always adjust the time duration in the “glide” blocks if you think the boats moves too fast or too slow. But before we move on, I want to address a small issue. After switching to glide blocks, once the animation starts, the boat first glides slowly to its starting position. This in my opinion does not look good. Instead, it doesn’t where the boat is when the animation starts, we do want the boat to be teleported to its starting position and only then glide from there. So it seems that we should not replace the very first “go to” block with a “glide” block. So let’s change it back to “go to”. Now, if we run it again, it instantly goes to the starting position and then glide from there. Cool! |
| Glide to sprite | * Ok, the animation is getting better and it is nearly done! But let’s say just as you are about to show this amazing animation to your friends and families, you suddenly change you mind and decide that you want a more direct route for your boat to get to the treasure.  This means you want to swap the coconut tree with the volcano. Like this. Now you can pretty go through a straight line to the treasure. Let’s run the code and see if this is the case!

* Test. OK, first go to mango island, then … Ouch, we are heading towards the volcano island, that’s crazy and we should never do that! But why? Why did the boat decide to take the risky move and not head towards to the coconut island instead? Can anyone has a guess? Yes! It’s not the boat who decides to go to the volcano island, it’s us! Because we told it to! Take a look at this glide block after the boat has arrived at mango island. Where are these two coordinates point to? Yes, they still point to the same island where it used to grow coconut trees! But unfortunately, we have just swapped the sprites and it is a volcano island now! Totally unaware of this, our boat still heads there in search of some delicious coconuts! Ouch! 

* OK, we have a problem. By using coordinates to tell the boat where to go, it always goes through the islands in the same order, doesn’t matter what is on those islands. What we really want is for the boat to follow the sprites on the islands. If what’s on an island changes from coconut tree to volcano, then we should stop visiting that island. Instead, we should go to whichever island that currently has the coconut tree. In other words, the boat should go to sprites and not coordinates.

* Ok, after understanding the cause of the problem, let’s take a look at our code. Currently, we glide the boat to the coordinates of each sprite. As a result, if the sprite moves to a different place, the boat still goes to the same old location. And this is why it now sails to the volcano island. We can solve this problem if there is a way to tell the boat to glide to sprites instead. Hmmm…still remember earlier on, we saw two “glide” blocks in the Motion category? Right? We used one of them, how about the other one? Let’s drag that out and take a closer look.

* So this block also has a slot for time to control how fast to glide. This is the same as before. But there difference is, instead of using x and y coordinates to specify where to glide to, it has a dropdown list. By default, it is “random position”. This means the sprite is going to glide to anywhere on the stage randomly and we don’t know where. This is clearly not what we want. So click and open the list to see what else we have. Now, we can see a bunch more options. The one that after “random position” is “mouse-pointer”. This glides the sprite to where your mouse pointer. It can be pretty useful in some games when you want a sprite to follow your mouse. But we are not going to use it here either. Ok, take a look at the next 5 options, do they look familiar? Yes, they are the other 5 sprites in our project, coconut tree, mango tree, scorpion, volcano and treasure chest. Now, what do you think would happen if I choose “mango tree”? Any guess? Let’s try. Move the boat back to its starting position. Click the glide block to run it, and yes, the boat glides to the mango tree island in one second. What if I change the option to “Treasure chest”? And yes, it glides straight to the treasure! So with this glide block, you can tell the boat to glide to any other sprite in the project! Of course, there is not option of “boat” because you cannot glide a boat to itself. Because this code block glides to a sprite, I would just call it “glide to sprite” block. 

* Ok, now, we can replace all the glide blocks using x and y coordinates with this “glide to sprite” block. So after going to the start position and wait for one second, we glide to mango tree first and wait for one second. Next, glide to coconut tree and wait for one second again. Finally, glide to treasure chest. Ok, let’s test this out!

* Test. Aha, yes! The boat now goes through mango tree island and then coconut tree island and finally reaching the treasure. It no longer goes to the volcano island! And what is good about this script is that, if we swap the coconut tree and volcano back again, and run the code, the boat takes a different route, but still follows the mango tree first and then coconut tree next. It never goes to those dangerous islands! Awesome!  |
| Draw map | * OK, our explorer’s mission is complete, we found the treasure! But as all the great explorer did in history, whenever they found treasure or new land, they also plotted out the map for the route so that they can revisit the same place later on, or pass it on for people in the future to continue the exploration. So, as our boat moves from island to island, we also want to draw the route on the map! 

* Ok, think about how you normally draw at home or at school, you would most likely get a drawing toolkit with pens of different colors and a piece of paper, then depending on what you want to draw, you pick one of those pens and then start drawing on the paper. In Scratch, the stage is just that piece of paper, everything you draw is going to be on the stage. But what about the drawing toolkit? Where are those color pens? Well, for that we need to introduce the concept of “Extensions”. 

* In Scratch, we have a lot of blocks organized into different categories. You can think of each category as a toolkit. For example, there is a toolkit for motions. In that toolkit, you are going to find all the code blocks that allow you to control how sprites move. Similarly for the other categories. But unfortunately, there is no toolkit for drawing. This is when “Extensions” come in. The name “Extensions” means that they extend what Scratch can do. You can think of extensions as extra toolkits that do not come with Scratch. And guess what, there is an extension toolkit for drawing! 

* But how do you find and use extensions? Well, if you take a look at the icons on the leftmost column in the editor, currently we are on “Code”. Now, if you look down, you can see one called “Extension”. Click that and we are entering the extension library. Like the sprite library and backdrop library we have seen before, an extension library is just a collection of extensions for you to choose and use. There are extensions for doing many different things, and they are also organized into different categories as you can see from the tabs at the top. In this course, the only extension we are going to use is this first one called “Pen”. This is drawing toolkit you can use to draw in Scratch. To use it, just click the blue button that says “Install”, and once it changes to this grey button that says “installed”, you can start use it. Ok, click the “Code” icon again to go back to the main editor. Now, if you take a look at the block palette, do you notice any difference? Aha, yes, we have a new category called “Pen”! And if you click it, you can see a bunch of new green code block that you can can use to draw on the stage! Let’s see how to use them!

* Now, when it comes to drawing, you need to forget what the sprite actually is and always think of it as a pen. So our boat becomes a pen, and we are going to use it to draw. Now, imagine having a pen in your hand and a piece of paper in front you, what is the first thing you need to do if you want to start drawing on the paper? Yes, you need to put the pen down. If you take a look at the blocks in the Pen extension, there is one called “pen down”. This is exactly like you putting down you pen on the paper. So let’s drag this out into the code area. As I said, we need to think of the boat as a pen now. So as the boat moves, it should draw a line behind, right? But that is not going to happen if the pen has not been put down. So when the flag is clicked, the first thing we need to do is probably putting the pen down. So let’s insert this “pen down” block right after the “when flag clicked” hat block and before the “go to” block. Let’s try to see what would happen.

* Test. Aha, as you see, as the boat moves from island to island, it also draws lines behind so that all the islands are connected to create a route map. That’s cool! What if we run it again? Ah, I can see two problems immediately here. Can you spot them? Yes, the first problem is that the route map we drew previously was still there the second time we ran the program. Ideally, each time we run the code, it should start with a clean sheet, meaning there should not be any drawings on the stage. Luckily, this is a easy to solve. In the pen extension, there is a block called “erase all”. Well, as the name suggests, it erases everything drew on the stage, so we can start with a blank piece of paper. When do you think we should run this code block? Yes, this should be run as the very first thing in our script, meaning right after the “when flag clicked” block. So let’s insert it there, before the pen down block. Think of it as you using an eraser to erase everything on you piece of paper before you start drawing again. Let’s run it again. Right, this time, the route map drew previously was completely erased the second time we run the code. The first problem solved!

* But there seems to be another problem. When we start the animation again, the boat goes from the treasure island back to its starting position. But it always draws a line between these two locations. Why is that? No idea? Let’s me ask you this, which code block move the boat back to its starting position? Yes, this “go to” block here. OK, the next question is, when do we put the pen down? Yes, here, right before the “go to” block. So it’s like you putting down the pen on the paper and then start moving it. Do you think this is going to draw anything on the paper? Of course! What if you don’t want to start drawing until you have move the pen to the right starting point? Yes, you do not put the pen down until you are in place. So, what is the solution? Yes, we just need to change the order of the “pen down” block and the “go to” block so that we move the pen in place before putting it down. Let’s try again! 

* Test. Hmmm…even with this change, we still see a line being drawn between the treasure island and the starting position. Something is still not quite right. Let’s think about it. The reason a line is still being drawn from the treasure island to the starting position is because the pen must be down before this “go to” block is run. But why? We only just put the pen down after the “go to” block, right? Here is something you need to know about the “pen down” block. Whenever it is run, the pen is down. Ok, that’s obvious and we know that. But the tricky thing is, once it is down, it is down forever! What does that mean? Ok, if you run the program once, the pen is put down and the map is drawn. But the pen is never lifted up. This means, the next time you run the program, the pen is already down even before everything starts! Now, since the pen is already down, when we try to move the boat back to its starting position from the treasure island, of course it is going to draw a line, right? So what should we do then? Well, simple, if we can just lift the pen up before moving the boat back to its starting position, then this should solve the problem, right? Now, since there is a block to put the pen down, my guess is that there must be another block to lift the pen up! Can you find that? Yes, it’s again in the pen extension called “pen up”. Let’s just insert it right before the “go to” block. So we lift the pen up before moving the boat to the starting position. Because the pen is up, so nothing should be drawn. Then just before the boat is about to set sail, we put the pen down, so a route map can be drawn. Cool, let’s test this out! 

* Test. Aha, yes, that line is gone! We are only left with the route map after the boat has reached the treasure island! Awesome! 

* Now, like in real drawing, you could also choose the color of the pen or decide how thick or thin you want to lines to be with the pen extension. To set the color of the pen, use the “set pen color to” block. This has something we have never seen before, it’s neither a slot where you can enter text or numbers, nor a list you where you can choose an option. If you click this circle thing here, you have a small pop up window with three sliders that allow you to create the color you want. Hmmm… have we seen those three sliders anywhere else? Yes, in the costume editor or the backdrop editor where we choose the fill color. I have already explain the meaning of the color, saturation and brightness sliders. So I’m not going to repeat myself again. Here you can play with those three sliders and create the color you like. For me, I want to have a orange color. Yep, that looks good. Next, we need to decide where to put this block. Since the pen only starts to draw after you have put it down, by which time you should already have your color picked, we just need to make sure the color is set before the “pen down” block. So let’s just move it here. Let’s test the code.

* Test. Yep, the line of the route has change to orange. Of course, you can choose any color you like.

* Ok, this all looks pretty nice! The last change I want to make is just to make the lines thicker. Because I think they are too thin now and a little bit hard to see. To change the size of the lines, you just need to use this “set pen size to” block. The default value in its slot is 1 and this is the smallest size you can set. To make the line thinker, you just need to enter a bigger value. For example, let me type in 5. And like “set pen color” block, we just need to make sure the pen size is set before the pen is put down. So once again, let’s insert this block right before the “pen down” block. Ok, let’s run the program again!

* Test. Aha, yes, the lines become much thinker and much easier to see! Awesome! |
| Refinement | * Add sound “Coin” when reaches each checkpoint
* Add sound “Tada” when reaches crystal
* Switch Frank’s costume when reaches the crystal |

### Exercise

- What would happen if you don’t put the costume at the center of the canvas? Explore and share with us what you found!
- Try out the other tools in the Backdrop editors’ tool box and figure out what they do? What things you can draw or create with them?
- Can you use the Costume Editor to draw your own sprites for the animation?
- When have learnt how to use the “go to” and “glide” blocks to make sprites go to certain locations on the stage, can you find other blocks to do that in the Motion category?
- Currently, I may move some sprites on the stage by accident. Whenever this happens, I need to move them back to their original positions. A better way is to have all sprites move to their starting positions when the Go button is clicked. How can we do that?
- We used the “set pen color to” to change the color our pen. What other attributes of the pen can you change? Try them out and see what happen!
- Is there a minimum and a maximum number you can set for the pen size? Try it out!
- How can you make the animation even better? For example, adding sounds when the boat arrives at each island and reaching the treasure at the end. What else you can you think of?
- Use what you learn, and create animations in different themes!