# 0 Hello Scratch

### Background

### What to learn

### Lesson Plans

#### Introduction

* Ok everyone, welcome! Welcome to your first coding course. My name is Jing, the founder of Coderland. And I will be your teacher, your guide and your friend in this wonderful coding journey we are about to start! This course is all about Scratch, one of the most popular coding languages for young kids like all of you sitting here today! Scratch is fun and simple, but at the same time very powerful. Here are just a few example games that kids around the world have created with Scratch. You can use it for all sorts of fun stuffs, including animations, simulations and games, and your imagination is the limit! In this course, we are going to start from ground zero, and cover all the basics of Scratch. By the end of it, you will be able to create animation this like, or games like that. And trust me, there is no rocket science here, it is all just easy and fun activities that we are going to do together! Sounds exciting to you? Let’s begin!

#### What is coding

* But before we dive straight into Scratch, let’s me ask everybody a question first: what is coding after all? People have been talking about coding all the time, so what exactly is it? Is there anyone here want to share your thoughts? Good! Very good!

* To understand coding, we need to talk about languages first. As humans, we use all kinds of different natural languages in different parts of the world, right? For example, there is Chinese, English, Spanish etc. We use them to communicate, to exchange information, and to give instructions. Each language is spoken and understood by a particular group of people. For example, Chinese is mostly spoken and used in China, and English is mostly spoken and used in countries like US, UK, Canada, Australia, etc. And unlike most other coding courses, our course is also taught in English. So this is what we normally think about when the word “language” comes up, right? 

* Ok. Back in the 60s and 70s, some really smart people invented some of the very first “computers”. They were often large machines that occupied entire rooms. But there is a reason for their hug sizes, can do amazing things that no human can. For example, they can be used to solve complex mathematical equations and analyze data very quickly, usually in seconds. But here is a question, although computers are powerful, but they are just machines after all, they do not have their own minds. So how do they know what exactly to do? Which exact math equation to solve? What analysis to do on data? Well, the answer is, we, the intelligent humans tell them what to do! But how? Or let me put it this way: which language do we use to tell the computers what to do? Do we speak Chinese to them? Do we speak English to them? Or do we speak some other languages? 

* Well, the answer is, we invented special languages that computer can understand. These are also often called “Programming Languages”, languages we use to communicate with computers and tell them what to do. Imagine a toy robot that can understand simple instructions in the English language. For example, you can give instruction like “move forward”, “turn left” or “pick things up”, and then it would just do whatever you told it to do. Same with computers, we use programming languages to put together a set of instructions for a certain task. We then give these instructions to a computer for it to follow and complete the task for us. The instructions are often called “Codes” or “Programs”, and putting the instructions together in a way so that a computer can understand and carry out the task is often called “Coding” or “Programming”. 

* In the last few decades, people all over the world have invented thousands of languages used all sorts of different purposes. Some are used to send rockets into space, some are used to create the apps you used daily, and some are used to create games that everyone loves. Programming languages are used everywhere to create all the digital products we consume everyday. So knowing what programming languages are and being able to used them to talk to a computer is a very important skill for everyone, you and me.  |
#### Why should you learn coding

* Ok, hopefully, you have some basic understanding of what programming languages are and what coding is all about. If you still not sure whether learning coding is a good idea or not, let me try to convince you here.

* First, learning coding helps you to solve problems, not simple ones, but the more complex kinds. Because coding will teach you to how to break down complex problems into smaller, more manageable steps. This skill is invaluable in all areas of life. It also helps you with logical thinking.  When you code, you're essentially teaching a computer how to think. This requires logical thinking and understanding cause-and-effect relationships.

* Secondly, learning coding helps you to be more creative and imaginative. You can bringing ideas to life, no matter how crazy they are. Whether it's creating a game, designing a website, or building an app, you can use coding to realized your wildest dreams. 

* Thirdly, coding is becoming increasingly important in our technology-driven world. As I said earlier, pretty much all the digital products we used today are created with some kind of coding. Coding is a skill that is becoming as important as reading and writing. 

* Fourthly, coding often involve working with others. This teaches you valuable teamwork skills, such as communication, cooperation, and problem-solving together. You also get the chance to share your knowledge with others and contribute to the community.

* Finally, and there is, in my opinion, the most important benefit of learning coding: it helps you to build confidence and resilience. Coding can be challenging at times. But by trying and failing again and again, and eventually, achieving your goals, you become more and more confident and resilient in the process. And this can carry over to all other things you do in your life. So, coding is more than just learning a new skill; it's a way of thinking, problem-solving, and creating. It's a valuable asset that can benefit everyone one of us, especially young kids like you, in many areas of our lives, both now and in the future. 

#### Hello Scratch

* Ok, with all the background information introduced and the motivation talk given, it is finally time to meet Scratch! As I have mentioned earlier, there are now thousands of programming languages in the world and the number is still growing. In this course, we are going to learn one of the most popular programming language called Scratch. It is specifically designed for kids like you! So coding in Scratch is both easy and fun!

* Scratch was developed by the MIT media lab back in 2003. In the last 20 years or so since its initial introduction, it has become one of the most popular programming languages in the world, especially among young kids. Unlike most other programming languages, which are like this, or this, Scratch is very visual and colorful, writing programs is just like playing with LEGO bricks. Most importantly, it’s super easy to get started and quickly create some amazing animations and games, as we’re going to experience together throughout this course. 

#### Scratch Community

* One of the reasons why Scratch become so popular is not just because it’s fun programming language to play with, but also because it has a very large online community with millions of kids or even adults creating super interesting projects for everyone to see and play with. One such place where people share Scratch projects is the official Scratch website. The website’s address is “scratch.mit.edu”. Sadly, I have to let you know that, if you are based in mainland China, it’s very likely that this website is not accessible to you. So you might be getting an error pages that says something like “Page Not Found”. I’m going to go into the reasons why this is not available. However, if for whatever reason, you can access this website, then by all means, go there, explore it and see what people have created. 

* Now, what should the rest of you who cannot access this website do then? Aha, don’t worry, I have you covered! There is an alternative place where most of the Scratch creators in China share their projects and this is called the “CoCreate World” or short for “CCW”. It’s official website is “www.ccw.site”. Once you are landed at the homepage, you can see a lot of different projects people have created and shared. You can click any one that looks interesting you, and this opens up another new page for that project. Here, you would find out who the creator was, a brief description of the project, and if it is a game, there usually also a section here that gives you all the instructions of how to play the game. To start the project, just click this big green “Run” button here. Once it’s started, if you think the window is too small, you can click this button to make it full screen, and click it again to exit full screen. Also, you can pause the project by clicking this “Pause” button here, and to resume, just click it again. Below the window, there are a few buttons, so you can “like” the project, bookmark it, or gives some coins to the creator. And if you really really like the project, you can also leave a nice and friendly comment. Ok, there is just one random example I chose to show you. But, as you’ve probably already seen, there are so many interesting projects here that it’s impossible for me to go over all of them in the class. So, free feel to explore on your own after the class. 

* Ok, You might be wondering how on earth do people create such amazing Scratch projects! Well, I know you are getting very excited now and cannot wait to build the next Black Myth: Wukong. But, as everything else in life, we need to get the foundation solid before a skyscraper can be built on top. And it’s the goal of this course to lay the foundation for you so that you can also create amazing projects like these. Of course, since this is a beginner’s Scratch course, you probably still won’t be able to create things as crazy as these after taking it. But hey, everything starts from nothing, right? And I’m going to be your teacher, partner and friend to go through this course together with you. And trust me, after finishing the course, you will have a solid understanding of all the basic concepts in Scratch, so you will be more than capable to explore the outside world independently on your own, or, if you really like me or the way the way I teach, join my advanced Scratch course to create even more exciting projects!
* 
#### CCW Register/Login

* Ok, back to CoCreate world. In this course, we are going to use CCW as our main platform to create and share class projects. For that, everyone of you need to first create an account. If you are still at the homepage, in the upper right corner, there is a button that says “Log in/Register”. Click that, and it opens up a small window. Here you can either log in if you already have an account or register a new account. Or if you already have an account for “西瓜创客”, QQ, or WeChat, you can use that to log in as well. If you have none of these, then you need a mobile phone number to register. If you don’t have a phone number, you can use your parent’s phone number. Once you have the phone number, just type it in, and get the verification code, and type the code in and you are done with the registration (Need to figure out how best to do this). Since I have already registered, I can just go ahead and log in. Also, if you loggin once, then you normally don’t have to do it again next time, because the website can remember you and keep you loggin. But if for whatever reason, you are logged out, just use the phone number and log in again

#### Gandi IDE: First impression

* Ok, once you logged in, there are a few new icons in the upper right corner. The one that looks like an envelop is for viewing all the messages for you. This can be messages from the CCW website or messages from other creators. Since we are just starting, it’s unlikely that you are going to get messages from other creators. You might get a few messages from CCW every now and then, for things like upcoming game competition, or system updates etc. But usually, they are not important for us at the moment. Ok, the next button is this smiley face with a sunglasses on. This is called the “creator’s center”. If you click that, it opens a new page. Here is where you can find all the projects you have created. There are two tabs here, one says “public projects” and the other one says “private projects”. For each project, you can set it to either public or private. A public project can be seen and played by everybody else in the CoCreate World. So this is usually your finished projects that you really want to share with everybody. On contrary, a private project is only accessible to you. No one else can see it, let alone play with it. This is usually projects that are still under development, so you are half way done and do not want to share this unfinished project with anyone else. Of course, since we are just starting, we do not have any public projects or private projects. Ok, let’s close this webpage for now.

* Now, I know what you have been thinking: yeah, yeah, this all good and cool, but HOW do I create a project? Aha, it’s what this button is for, it says “Go Create”. Now, if you hover your mouse over without clicking it, you can see there are two options: Create a new Project and Write a new Article. In this course, we are not going to write any articles. But of course, if you really have some interesting thoughts that you would like to write an article about and share with other people, feel free to do it. Here, we almost always choose the “Create a new Project” option. Click that, and once again, a new page opens up. OK, you might see an announcement window, but usually, there is nothing interesting or important, so let me just close it by clicking this little cross button here. 

* OK, you might be talking to yourself: what the hell is this???? Well, this is a called a “Scratch Editor”. A “Scratch Editor”, what is that? Well, let me ask you this, what do you use to browse the web? Yes, a web browser! What do you use to paint something on the computer or an iPad? Yes, a drawing app! Ok, now what do you use to create a Scratch program or project? Yes, a “Scratch Editor”! It has everything we need to create, run and share our Scratch programs! Just like you can use different browsers, such as Google chrome, Microsoft Edge or Firefox to browse the web, you can also use different Scratch editors to create Scratch programs. This one that we are looking here from COCreate World is called “Gandi IDE”, as can be seen from the upper left corner. Sometimes, you might hear people mentioning other editors such as the official Scratch Editor or Turbowarp. They all look and work very similar, and once you’ve learned how to use one, you can easily move to a different one. The only reason I chose Gandi IDE is because it also comes with the CoCreate World community where we can share projects with each other. 

* Ok, I know, if this is the first time you ever open a Scratch editor, it might look a little bit scary. There are just so many things going on! Well, don’t worry, it is not as bad as it first seems. And we are going to walk through the most important bits in the editor in details. After that, I’m sure you will feel much more comfortable working with it. So let’s begin!

#### Top bar

* Let’s look at the top first. Here you have the “Gandi IDE” logo. Next to is the name of your projects. By default, all projects you create start with the name “My Project”. Of course, this name is too general and does not mean anything. Ideally, we should give the project a name that we can easily remember and maybe even tells a little bit about what the project is. This becomes more important when you have more and more projects later on. It helps you to quickly find the one you are looking for. Sine this is our very first lesson introductory class about Scratch, I’m just going to name it ‘Hello, Scratch!’. 

* Next to the project name is a little icon that looks like a file folder. If you click it, a drop down message pops up with a number of options. The first one is “Save now”. This saves your project as soon as you click it. It’s always a good idea to save your projects as often as possible. Because there can be a power outage, your computer can crash, and there are more cases when you can lose all your work. But if you save it frequent enough, then you should be fine. Let’s click it and save our project. Now, if you go back to the CCW website and go to your “Creator Center”, you would notice that there is now a project called “Hello, Scratch!” under the “Private Projects” tab. So our new project has been saved safely and we do not need to worry about losing anything work! Fabulous! Also, this tells you that every time a project is created, it is by default a private one. I’m going to explain how you can turn a private project into a public one later on. Now, if you want to continue working on this project, you can click this “Go Perfect” button. Or, if you want to delete it, you can click this “Delete” button. Once you do that, it’s going to ask if you really want to do that, if so, click the “confirm” button, if not, click this “maybe not” button. Because I don’t want to delete my project, so let me keep it for now. Ok, let me click the “Go Perfect” button. Now, a small window pops up. Remember earlier when I explained what a Scratch editor, I mentioned a few options, Gandi IDE is one, and there is also a Scratch official editor. Here CCW lets you choose between the official one on the left and Gandi IDE on the right. Let’s first choose the official one by clicking it and then click the “Create” button at the bottom. Ok, this opens our project with the Scratch official editor. You might notice that it is not very different from Gandi IDE. Of course, the biggest difference is that it has a light color theme. Some people prefer the official editor. But personally, I find that a dark color theme looks nicer and also Gandi IDE adds more fancy things, so in the course, I will stick with Gandi IDE and I would also recommend you doing that as well. So, let’s close the official editor and go back to the “Creator Center”.  Let me click “Go Perfect” button again, and this time, I’m choosing the Gandi IDE on the right. Also, if you don’t want to see this pop window everytime because you just want to stick with Gandi IDE, just check this box here that says “Keep the current selection as default”. Ok, now click the “Create Button” and we are back in Gandi IDE.

* Right, where were we. Ah, yes, we were talking about the “Save now” option in the dropdown menu. There are four more options, and they can be useful in some cases. But I do not want go into details now, and I will explain whenever we need them. For now, saving your project as often as possible is the most important thing you should know. If you find that click the “Save now” button each time to save a project is a pain in the neck, then a much quicker way to do it is by pressing the “Ctrl” and the “S” keys on your keyboard at the same time. This would also save your project right away. Now, if I press them now, you can see a message that says “Saving project…” and then very quickly becomes “Project saved”. This means you project has been saved in the CCW website and you can access it later whenever you want. Cool. 

* Now, before we move on, you might still be thinking the question of “How can I turn a project from private to public? Because I want share it with everyone!”. Ok, do you see this “Publish Project” button in the middle here? This is how you make a project public! Do you know how a news agency makes a article available for everyone to read? Yes, they publish it, either on the website or on the app. Similarly, you make your project available for everyone to try, you make public by publishing it to the CCW website. Let’s me click it, and a new window pops up again. There are many options that you can choose and set for your project. Again, most of them are not important to us right now. So I will skip those. The only important ones are the title of the project, which is “Hello, Scratch!”. Of course, you can change it to something else here if you want. And the other important one is choose how you want people to interact with your project. The first one here is using a traditional PC keyboard, the second one is using a touch screen, such as and iPad, and the last one is the custom keyboard. For this course, we would always use the traditional PC keyboard to interact with our project, so always choose the first option. Now, you can just skip the rest and scroll all the way down to the button, and click the green “Submit for Review” button. So CCW is going to have someone to review your project just to make sure that it does not contain anything inappropriate. And once that’s done, your project becomes public and available to everybody else. Since we have a pretty much empty project here, the review is pretty quick. Now, if we go back to the “Creator Center” again, you can now see that the project is under the “Public Projects” tab now. And the “Private Projects” tab is now empty. Our project is public and live! Pretty cool!

* A small change you might notice is that, once the project becomes public, the buttons next to it also change. When it was private, there are two buttons, one to continue working on the project, and the other one to delete the project. But now, it becomes “Go Iterate”, “Stats”, “Project Details”, and there are three little dots here that you can click, which gives you two more options, one to make the project visible to yourself only, and the other one to delete this project. Now, here I only want to mention the “To improve” button. It opens the project in Gandi IDE again so that you can improve it, such as fixing problems or making it more interesting. Let’s click that and once again and go back to the Gandi IDE. 

#### Left most column

* Right, after understanding the main buttons on the top, let’s move down and take a look at the left side of the editor. First, there are a number of small icons in the left most column. If you hover your mouse over, it tells you what that icon is. For example, currently we are at the first icon, which says “Code”. This means what you are seeing here is for writing Scratch code. The remaining icon are for different purposes, but since we are not likely going to use any of them, I will just skip them all here. 

* But there is one that I do want to talk about. It is this last one with a gear icon. It is called “Setting”. Click it and a small window pops up. Here you can set a bunch of things regarding how the editor looks and behaves. Here, I just want to change the following settings. First, for the stage size, it is 16:9 by default, but I want you to change it to 4:3. Because this is the standard stage size used Scratch. Ok, you be wondering what a stage is. Don’t worry, we will come to that very soon. Next, since I’m going to teach this course in English, we would use the English language for the editor as well. So you scroll down a little bit, there is a setting called “Language”, click the dropdown menu and select “English”. If your editor starts in Chinese, you can do this to change it to English just like mine. That’s it, these are the only two settings I want you to change for the course. You are free to explore the rest on your own. Once you are done, just click the cross in the upper left corner to close the Setting window and get back to the editor.

#### Stage

* Ok, let’s move on to the right side of the editor. Did you see this big white area with a cute little robot? This is called the “Stage”. Remember, we have just changed its size a minute ago! So, what is a stage? Well, if you go to a theatre to watch a play or a concert, where do all the actors or musicians do their performance? Yes, a Stage right in the middle of the theatre, right? This is where all the exciting thing are happening, and where all the audience in the theatre would focus on. Same in Scratch, whatever project you create, whether it’s an animation or a game, all the exciting things should happen somewhere, right? Can you guess where that is? Yes, it’s also the Stage. In this case, the Stage is just this white rectangle here. And this robot is the actor on the stage. In Scratch this is called a Sprite. We will explain what a sprite is and how you can use them later on. Right now, let’s still focus on the stage. 

* If you take a look at the top of the stage, you would notice three color buttons: the green one with a white flag is called “Go”. This is the button you would click to start running your project. The amber one next to it is called “Pause”, you can you pause your project while it is running. The the last red one is called “Stop”, you click it to stop running your project. We often see similar buttons in music and video apps, where you can click those three button to start, pause and stop the music or the video.

* Finally, if you feel like the stage is too small, you can always make it full screen by clicking this icon with four outward pointing arrows. Once I click it, everything else in the editor is hidden, with only the stage at the center of the screen. But it is much bigger now. At the same time, that icon changes to four inward pointing arrows. If I click it again, everything in the editor is back and the stage is now back to its original size.

#### Sprite (list)

* Ok, the stage is set, what next? Yes, we need to actor or the musicians to perform on the stage, right? Actually, we have already seen such such an actor, it’s the robot here. By default, every new project you create comes with this. But in Scratch, we can them “Sprite” instead, same meaning as an actor, just sounds cooler. Just like a play or a concert where you can have more than on actors or musicians, you can also have more than one sprite in Scratch. Here, we have just one, but as I will show very soon, you can add as many as you want. 

* If you now take a look at the lower right corner of the editor, you would see a smaller image of the robot with text “Sprite1” next to it. If you click it, the robot on the stage is highlighted with a rectangle box. So this area here is a called the “Sprite List”, well it is a list of sprites that are currently on the stage. This helps us to better manage all sprites, especially if you have a lot of them. Since we only have one sprite at the moment, the list has only one item. But we can add more. There is this big plus button right at the corner. If you hover your mouse over, a small list pops up with a few icons. These are all the different ways you can add a new Sprite to the project. We are not going to go through them all here as they will be explained later in the course when we actually use them. For now, let’s just click this magnifying glass that says ‘Choose a Sprite’.

* It opens up a new window. Here you can find all the possible sprites that come with the Gandi IDE. This is also often called the ‘Sprite Library’. Just like a real library that contains a lot of book, a sprite library contains a lot of sprites. There are a few buttons up top. These buttons divide all the sprites into different categories. To see all the sprites in a category, just click that button, for example “Animals”,  and as you can see, it now only shows all the animal sprites. Or “Food”, now you have all the food sprites. To see all the sprites again, just click this “All” button. You can also use this search box here to quickly find a sprite. For example, let’s say I want to find all the cat sprites. All I need to do is just type in the word “cat” in the search box, and the library is going to filter out all the cat sprites for you. Pretty cool! Now, to add a new sprite to our project and onto the stage, you can just click the sprite. For example, I want to add this Scratch cat, just click it, and then you are back to the main editor screen. Now take a look at the stage, see any difference? Yes, we have a new Scratch Cat sprite on the stage, along with the robot. And take a look at the sprite list, did you see a new item? Yes, the new scratch cat is also added to the sprite list. So this is one of the most common way to add new sprite to you project: simply search for it in the sprite library and click to add it. 

* What if you add a wrong sprite, or what if you don’t want a sprite any more? How can you delete it? For example, I don’t want the Robot sprite any more and want to take it off the stage, what can I do? There are two ways: first, notice the three little dots next to each sprite list item? Click it, and a small menu pops up. One of the options in the menu is “delete”. Click it and the robot sprite is gone! The other way is to hover your mouse over the sprite you want to delete, for example. this Scratch cat, right click your mouse, the same menu pops up and you can select “delete” again. But I will not do it here because I still want to keep this sprite. But hopefully, you get the idea. 

#### Sprite properties

* Ok, whenever a sprite is selected, did you notice all the information below the stage and above the sprite list? This is what I called the “Property Panel” for a sprite. A property is a characteristic of something. When it comes to a sprite, it could be its name, its position, how it looks etc etc. Here we can see a total of six properties and let’s take a look at them one by one. 

* The first one is called “Sprite” and there is an entry box next to it. This is where you can give a name to your sprite. Currently, the Scratch cat has a very uninspiring name “Cat”. That’s ok. But you can give a more interesting one, such as “Bunny”. Ok, I don’t know why people would call a cat “Bunny”, but a friend of mine does have his cat named “Bunny”. So, yeah. People do it. To change the name, just hover your mouse over the entry box, click it, and you can see it’s been highlighted. Now you can type in the new name “Bunny”. Also, notice that the item in the sprite list changes to “Bunny” as well. 

* Right, next, when you first add a new sprite from the library, it is placed right at the center of the stage. As we will learn later on, Scratch uses two numbers, “x” and “y” to decide where exactly is a sprite on the stage. Currently x is 0 and y is 0. These two numbers now represent the center position of the stage and this is why the cat is at the center. But of course, you can change the cat’s position. One way to do it is just click and drag the cat around. Once you are happy with its new position, just let go of the mouse. Now, take a look at the x and y values, see? Both of them have been changed. And these two new numbers represent the cat’s new position now. Again, in a later lesson, we will explain what these two number really mean. If you know exactly where you want the cat to go, you can also type in the numbers directly in these two entry boxes. For example, we already know that x 0 and y 0 represent the center of the stage. So if I want the cat to go back to the center, I can just type in 0 in both boxes. And there you go, the cat is back to the center. And there are also these little arrows here, the up arrow increases the number and the down arrow decreases the number. For example, if I click the up arrow for x, the number goes up, and notice the cat, it moves to the right. Similarly, if I click the down arrow, the number goes back down, the the cat moves left. So it seems that the x number has something to do with the sprite’s horizontal movement. How about the y number?  If I click the up arrow for y, the number goes up, and notice the cat, it moves up this time. Similarly, if I click the down arrow, the number goes back down, the the cat moves down. So it seems that the y number has something to do with the sprite’s vertical movement. Again, we will go into much more details later on, for now, I just want give you an intuitive feeling about what these two numbers do.  

* OK, moving on, the first property in the second line is called “show” and it has a little eye icon next to it. Let’s see what would happen if we click it. Now, the icon changes from an open eye to a closed eye. And at the same time, the cat is gone, we cannot see it anymore! What if I click the icon again? Aha, it changes back to an open eye, and the cat is back. So it seems that this property controls the visibility of a sprite, we can either show it or hide it. This is very useful in a lot of Scratch projects as we will see throughout this entire course. 

* Next, it’s the “Size” property. Well, I think the name should already tell you what it is for. Yes, it is for changing the size of the sprite. All sprites’ sizes start at 100 by default, and you can change the size by changing this number. For example, to make the cat half the size, let me type in 50, and the cat is now half of its original size. To make it twice as big, type in 200, and now it’s two times bigger. Again, you can also click the up and down arrows here to change the size number as well. 

* Finally, it’s the “direction” property and its start value is 90. Now, if you click that number, a circle pops up with an arrow pointing to the right at the moment. This is a bit like a clock face with a hand. Now, you can click and drag the arrow and turn it around. You can turn it clockwise or counter clockwise. As you are turning the arrow, two things change at the same time. First is that the cat sprite also turns, and the direction it faces is the same as the direction of the arrow. So the arrow basically controls where the sprite points to. Secondly, the number in the entry box also changes. It becomes bigger when we turn the arrow clockwise and smaller when we turn it counter clockwise. Now, you probably have no idea what these numbers really mean, but don’t worry, we will cover that in details in later classes. For now, you just need to know that we can change the direction of a sprite using this property. 

* OK, that very quickly goes through some of the most important properties of a sprite. Of course, we will be using them and changing them a lot in the course. So please do make sure you know about them and at least have a rough idea of what they do. We will be going into much more details in future lessons.

#### Backdrop

* Ok, let’s turn our attention back to the stage. The stage has a “Backdrop”, it’s basically everything inside the rectangle here, except all the sprites. Currently, the backdrop is just a dull plain white canvas. Now, think about any theater you have been to or seen on TV” What do all the stages look like? Well, they might look different, but they definitely have one thing in common: all stages have beautiful backdrops! They have been carefully designed to matched what ever the performance is on the stage. In Scratch, we would like the backdrop of our stage to be more interesting than a white canvas as well. And depending on the project, we want it to be different each time! For example, if we were creating a underwater game, we want to set the stage to be in the ocean. So if you think there must be a way to change the backdrop, then you are absolutely right! Yes, we can change the backdrop of our stage! 

* If you take a look at here just above the sprite list, you would see something that says “Stage: Backdrop1”. And there is a small white rectangle next to it, this is a thumbnail to show you what the current backdrops looks like. This entire thing here basically tells you that the current stage backdrop is called “Backdrop1” and it looks like a white rectangle. Ok, how can we change it? Well, if you now take a look at the upper left corner of the editor, just below the top bar, you would see three tabs: “Code”, “Backdrops” and “Sounds”. We would explain the other two later on, but right now, I want you to click the “Backdrops” tab. This brings us to Scratch’s “Backdrop Editor”. Now, if you guys are using Windows, you might have seen or used a built-in app called “Paint”, this one here. It gives you a bunch of basic tools to create simple drawings. Similar to this, the Scratch editor also comes with something similar for you to paint. Here, in the backdrop editor, you also have tools that you can use to draw your own backdrops. Of course, I don’t have enough time to show you how to use all the painting tools in this lesson, but we will use it later on in this course to draw our own sprites. The thing I really want you to know in this lesson is how to add an existing backdrop for our project. 

* If you take a look at the left column here, you would see an item called “backdrop1”, hmmm… did we come across that somewhere else? Yes, just above the sprite list, we have seen that the current backdrop for our stage is called “Backdrop1” and it is referring to this backdrop here. And as you can see from the Backdrop Editor, it’s just a white backdrop with nothing on it. OK, to add a new backdrop, hover your mouse over this big plus button at the bottom. A small menu then pops up, each option gives you a different way to add a backdrop. For example, you can upload an image from your computer for the backdrop, you can paint one yourself using the Backdrop Editor. Or, as I will show you here, you can choose a backdrop from one of the existing ones that come with Scratch with the magnifying glass icon. Does all these look familiar? Yes, we have very similar options when adding a sprite, right? Now, just like a sprite library, we are now entering the backdrop library, where there is a ton of existing backdrops for you to choose from. Like the sprites, they have also been organized into different categories. For example, if I choose “Underwater”, you would see two underwater backdrops. Another way to quickly find a backdrop you need is to simply search for it in the search box here. Now, let’s way I want to have the backdrop “Underwater 2”, click it, and now you can see that we have a new item in the backdrop list called “underwater 2”. And the pain editor also shows the image. Here you can change the backdrop if you want. But I will just leave it as it is. Now, if you click the “Code” tab again and go back to the main editor, see the difference? Yes, the backdrop of our stage has been changed to underwater, wohoo, our cat is in the ocean now! Also notice that the thumbnail of the backdrop here has also been changed to the underwater image. Pretty cool! And if for whatever reason, if you want to change the backdrop back to the white rectangle, you can just click the “Backdrops” tab again and click the first backdrop. Now, click the “Code” tab again to go back to the main editor, and there you go, we have the white backdrop again. So this is how you can change your stage backdrop to pretty much anything. And trust me, having a nice and interesting backdrop is one of the most important thing to get your project to the next level!

#### Block Palette and Code area

* Ok. So we can add new sprites and change backdrops. But right now, all sprites will be just sitting there without doing anything. The whole point of creating any animations or games in Scratch is to have one or more sprites do different things, like the real actors and musicians on a stage. And the way you control sprites is by using the Scratch programming language. Still remember our previous introduction to programming languages? Yes, we use them to communicate to a computer and give instructions to tell it what to do. There are thousands of programming languages in the world, and Scratch is one of them. So what does the Scratch programming language looks like? Well, do you see all these color blocks here? Yes, these are the instructions of the Scratch programming languages. All the amazing animations and games you have seen on the CCW or the Scratch official websites are created with these blocks! Can you believe that? And this area where all the blocks are is often called the “Palette”, because it’s kind of a like the palette a painter often uses for drawing.  

* If you scroll up and down the palette, the first thing you would notice is that, all the blocks are group under different categories. For for example, all the blue blocks are under “Motion”, all the purple blocks are under “Looks”, etc. And as you can probably guess from the names, “Motion” blocks probably control how sprites move, and “Looks” blocks probably control how sprites look and so on and so forth. Learning some of the most important blocks and how to use them in different animations and games will be a big part of this entire Scratch course. So we will not going into too much detail here because we will be spending quite a lot of time with them in future lessons. Right now, you can just think of each block as a basic instruction to tell a sprite what to do, whether it’s to move to some place, or change to a different look. By the way, since there are more than 100 blocks here, to make it easier for you to find the block you need, Scratch also provides these quick access icon for each block category. For example, if you want to use a block in the “variables” category, instead of scrolling all the way down, you can just block this icon that says “variables”, and this jumps you right to the variables blocks. Pretty cool! 

* Ok, now we have all these blocks, the next question is, how can we use them? Well, think about LEGO bricks, when you first open a LEGO box, what do you have? Yes, you just have a bunch of individual bricks. Now, how do you create, say a building, out of those bricks? Yes, you first prepare a large baseplate, then take the right ricks out of the box and use them to start building on top of the baseplate, right? And things are very similar in Scratch! Do you see this large area in the middle of the editor? Yes, this is the Scratch equivalent of a “baseplate”. Whatever program you build is going to be here. This is often called the “Scripts Area”, because in Scratch, programs or code are often called a “Scripts”. Now, the baseplate is ready. What next? Yes, the lego bricks! Where are the bricks? Yes, they are right here, in the “Palette”! All you need to do is just to find the block you need, click and drag it to the scripts area.  

* For example, if I want the cat to move, I can drag the ‘Move 10 steps’ block under the “Motion” category to the scripts area. Simple as that! And you now have your very first program, or very first script! This is a very simple script with just a single block. Later on, we are going to see scripts that contain many blocks. Ok, a script is just a set of instructions written down, we need to actually “run” it to see what it does! How do you run a script in Scratch? Simple, you just click it. See? Every time I click the script, it runs, and as a result, our cat moves to the right. Interesting! Now, let’s look at this move block more carefully. It has a white bubble with number “10” inside. This bubble is called a “slot” in Scratch. It the area where you can give some extra information to a block. For the move block, you use this number to it how many steps to move the sprite forward. By default, it is 10 steps. However, you can change it to any number you want, for example, I can change it 100. So now, the cat is going to move 100 steps each time I click the block. Let’s see if this is the case. Aha, yes, the cat now moves much further! And if you take a quick look at all the blocks, you would notice that many of them have “slots”. Some have one, and some have more. We will explain the differences as we come across each block later on in the course. 

* Let’s try a different block. We can not only move a sprite, but also get it say something. There is a block called “Say” under the “Looks” category. Well, actually, there are two “Say” blocks, but let’s play with the first one here. Drag it out into our scripts area. Now we have a second simple script with just a single block. Let’s click it and please pay attention to the cat while I’m doing it. Aha, did you see that? As I click and run the script, a speech bubble appears from our cat with the word ‘Hello’. Our cat can not only move, but also say something. Pretty nice! Now, like the “move” block, the “say” block also has slots for us to provide extra information. The difference in this case is that it has two instead of one slot. We use the first slot to provide the word or sentence for the cat to say. The default is just “Hello!“, but we can change it to anything, for example, I can get the cat to say “Hello, Scratchers!” instead. Click the block again and now you can see the cat says “Hello, Scratchers!”. We use the second slot to provide the amount of time the speech bubble should stay on the stage. The default is 2 seconds, so the bubble appears for 2 seconds and then goes away. Of course, you can give different numbers to make it stay shorter or longer. For example, let’s change it to 5 seconds, click the block again and now you can see that the speech bubble stays for much longer before it disappears. Pretty cool!

* Ok, we have two blocks in the scripts area, one moves the cat and one gets it say something. We can run both by clicking them one after the other. Now, what if I just want to click once and have both blocks run one after the other automatically? Well, if you ever play LEGO before, you probably notice that each brick has what we called “Studs” on top, that’s the bit that sticks out and “tubes” beneath. What are they used for? Yes, they are used for connecting two bricks together when you press the stud into a tube. Now, back to Scratch, have you ever noticed this little dent on top and this bit that sticks out beneath? Can you guess what they are used for? Yes, they are just like the “Studs” and “Tubes” of a LEGO brick, they are used for connecting blocks together! So, yes, you can connect multiple blocks together to create a bigger script. Let’s see how this is done!

* Right now, we have two blocks. Let’s say we want to connect them and have the “move” block up top and the “say” block beneath it. Click and drag the “say” block and move it towards the “Move” block. As it gets closer and closer, at some point, you will see a shadow of the “say” block appearing underneath the “move” block.  Now if you let go of the mouse, the “say” block will just snap right under the move block and they become a single script with two blocks. This way, you can stack as many blocks as you want, just like LEGO bricks. Can you guess what would happen if I click this script now? Yes, the cat will first move 10 steps and then say “Hello, Scratchers!” Why? Well, because when you have a script with more than one block connecting together, Scratch will run those blocks one by one, from top to bottom. So first run the “move” block and then run the “say” block. Let’s try to see if this is the case. Yep, the cat first moves to a new position and then says “Hello Scratchers!” This time, we only click the script once, and it does both things. Pretty neat!

* Ok, this opens up the door for us to create even longer scripts that can do many things. Let’s say I want the cat to wait a little bit after it has moved to the new location before saying the words. To get a sprite to wait, we use this “wait” block under the “Control” category. It also has a slot where you can enter the number of seconds to wait. The default is to wait for one second. Let’s make it wait a bit longer by changing the number to 2. Ok, let’s think about the sequence of events: we first want the cat to move 10 steps, then wait for 2 second, and finally say “Hello, Scrathers!”. What change do you think we should make to our script? Yes, we just need to add the “wait” block between the “move” block and the “say” block. Remember, Scratch runs the blocks in a script from top to bottom, one after the other. OK, there are two ways you can insert this “wait” block in between. The first way to do it is click and drag the “say” block away from the “move” block, then drag the “wait” block towards the “move” block and snap it below. Finally, snap the “say” block below the “wait” block. The second way to do it is to drag the wait block and hover it above the place where the “move” and “say” blocks are joined. Now, Scratch is going to separate those two block to make space for the new “wait” block. If you let go of the mouse, the “wait” block will just snap right between them. This is a much quicker and more convenient way to insert new blocks anywhere into a script. Ok, doesn’t matter how we do it, we now have a script with three blocks. When we click it, the blocks is going to run one after the other, from top to bottom. Let’s prove this! Yep, the cat first moves 100 steps, then waits for 2 seconds, and finally says “Hello Scratchers!”. Nice! Exactly what we expect!

* Now, like everything else in Scratch, if it can be added, then it can be deleted as well. Same with blocks. If there is a block that you do not want anymore, just hover your mouse over that block, right click, and choose ‘Delete Block’. Phew. It’s gone. Now if you delete the wrong block, don’t panic, just press the Ctrl+z key on your key board, and everything will be back. An even quicker way to delete blocks or scripts is just to drag it to the ‘Palette’, let go of the mouse, and the block is gone. Again, if you made the wrong move, just press Ctrl+Z to bring it back.

* Ok, here, we have created a very simple program or script with three simple blocks. And you know what, the entire Scratch course is all about learning the different blocks and how to join them together to create fun and exciting animations and games. And in fact, this is what “Coding” is all about! Today’s lesson is our very first step into this wonderful world, and we will cover a lot more throughout this entire course!

* Ok, now we have two blocks in the scripts area, one moves the cat and one gets it say something. We can run the by clicking them one by one. But here is a program, what if I want to get the cat say “Hello, Scrachers!” while it is moving? In other words, I want to run both blocks at the same time. Now, obviously, no matter how faster I’m, it’s just not physically possible for me to click both blocks at the same time, since I only have one mouse. So what can I do? Now, do you still remember earlier when we introduced the stage, I pointed out this green button here with a little flag? It’s the “Go” button. What does it do? Well, when you click it, it starts all the scripts in your project. Think of each script as a runner in a race, and we are the referee with the flag at the starting line. Once we wave the flag, all runner should start running at the same time. Same in Scratch, once we block the “Go” flag, all scripts should also start running at the same time. Since we have two scripts here, click the “Go” button should start both at the same time. Shall we try? Click it and….hmmmm….nothing happens, the cat neither moves nor says anything. What went wrong?

#### Summary

* Ok, this pretty much completes our very introduction to coding and Scratch. Hopefully this inspires you to explore more. Of course we have just scratch the surface here. There are just so much more to learn and play with in Scratch. And the whole point of this course is to take you on to this wonderful journey with me, so that you would eventually be able to create your dream animations or games in Scratch. So we have taken the first, and there is still a long way to go, I will see you all in the next lesson! |

### Exercises

- Find projects on CCW that interest you and share with us.
- Explore the editor on your own and shared any interesting findings.
- Try to play with the different blocks and get a sense of what they do