# 8 Let’s Paint!

[Projects | Computer coding for kids and teens | Raspberry Pi](https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/paint-box)

### What to learn

- Color, saturation, brightness and opacity in paint editor
- Circle drawing tool
- Shift key to draw perfect circle/square
- Relationship between center of costume and center of paint window
- Be curious and check the dropdown list of different blocks
- Use forever loop to control movement of a sprite (common mistake to forget)
- Making decision with if and else
- Group parts of the costume in to a whole
- Re-center a sprite
- Variable slider

### Blocks

- pen extension
- go to mouse pointer
- mouse down
- if then else
- variable
- set variable to
- mouse x/mouse y
- and operator
- greater than >

### Lesson Plan

| Step | Details |
| --- | --- |
| Background | * Ok, welcome back to another brand new lesson everyone! Today we are continuing into the second leg of  our Scratch journey! Does anyone here loves to draw? Yeah, a lot us love to draw from when we are little. My son loves to draw all the time! Ok, so what is the most common tool do you use to draw? Yeah, traditionally, you would often use something called a Paintbox which is a small, flat container that holds a set of different paints, like this. Then you would use a brush to select the color you need to paint on a piece of paper. But you know, we are all living in a digital world now, and this provides alternative ways to do a lot of things, including drawing. Nowadays, a lot people prefer to draw on their computer or on an iPad. 

* For those of you who use Windows PC, I’m pretty sure you have seen or used an app called “Microsoft Paint” before. You can just go to the Windows search bar and type in “Paint”, click the first result and there it is. Even though this is a very basic painting app, it still comes with a lot good stuffs for anything who loves to have a go at drawing on a computer. One of the most useful features is this digital version of the Color Palette. See those little color squares? Here, you can click anyone of them to select the corresponding color, and your mouse now becomes a brush. Just go to this big blank canvas and you can start drawing any lines or shapes in that color! If you have had enough with red, then just go to the Color Palette again and pick a different one! Now, no painting app would be complete without an eraser because people make mistakes! Here, you can click this little eraser icon and your mouse now turns into an eraser. Simply go to the bits you want to erase, click and hold your mouse to erase it! Voila! It’s gone! 

* What I have just shown you are the two most basic functionalities of any painting app. Whether it’s Microsoft Paint on Windows, or something similar on Mac or on iPad, you need to be able to, one, draw and two, erase. So in today’s lesson, we are going to use Scratch to build our own Painting app. Of course, it is not going to be as complete as Microsoft Paint application. Our goal with this app is pretty simple: first you can draw with it, second, you can erase what you have drawn. That’s it! As simple as it might sound, we are actually going to learn a ton of new interesting stuffs: we are going to see how message broadcasting can be used in situations other than a conversation, how to make use of some of the more advanced blocks in the Pen extension and most importantly, how to make decisions in Scratch! 

* A lot of exciting stuffs ahead! So, without further ado, let’s dive right in! |
| Blue Color circle | * OK, as we have seen earlier, Microsoft Paint has a Color Palette with a lot of color squares for you to choose from. For our simple painting app, we are only going to have 5 different colors: blue, green, red, yellow and black. Of course, once you know how to add those 5, adding more is going to be a piece of cake! Ok, so let’s first start with the Blue color!

* One difference between our Paint app and Microsoft Paint is that we are going to use circles instead of squares for the colors. Each color circle is going to be a sprite. Since a circle is a very simple shape and also because I want to show you some cool tricks in Scratch’s Paint editor, we are going to draw the circle ourselves instead of using any existing images. If you hover your mouse over the “Choose a sprite” button, you would see an icon with a paint brush that says “Paint”. If you click it, a new sprite with an empty costume is added to our project. Also, we are brought into the sprite Paint Editor direct. Right, it’s now for us to draw! But since this is going to be a blue circle, let’s first change the sprite’s name to “Blue” in the property panel. 

* Now, back in Lesson 2 “Treasure Hunt”, we drew our own backdrop in the Backdrop Editor. We have used different tools to draw shapes and choose colors. As you can see, the Costume Editor is actually exactly the same. We have the same set of tools to the left of the canvas. In “Treasure Hunt”, if you still remember, to draw an island, we first use the Rectangle tool to draw a rectangle and then use this Reshape tool to model it into an irregular island shape. Our task here is much simpler, all we want is just a perfect circle. And guess what? There is already a tool called Circle here. Click and select it. 

* Ok, still remember how to change the color of the shape you draw? Yes, we use the “Fill” here. The default color is purple, but here want blue instead. If you click it open, we can see the same four sliders as before: Color, Saturation, Brightness and Opacity. Ok, time for a quick recap: “Color” is, well, what the color is! So let’s move it until the color changes to a blueish one. Next, we have the “Saturation” slider. It means how intense the color is going to be. Right now, I think our blue is a bit faded, so let me move the sliders to the right to make it more saturated. So I think here is about right. Right, next, the “Brightness”. Well, as the name suggests, it determines how bright the color is. Currently it’s at 100%, so pretty bright. If I move it to the left, the blue gets darker and darer, until it becomes completely black at 0%. Here I think 100% looks right, so I’m not going to change it. Finally the “Opacity” controls how opaque the color is. At 100%, it is completely opaque, meaning you cannot see through it. If you move the slider left, it becomes more and more transparent, until the color is completely invisible at 0%. I do not want any transparency here, so let’s leave it at 100%. Ok, so I think we have our blue color picked! Of course, this is just my preference, if you don’t like this blue, you can always tweak it to suit your taste. No big deal!

* Right, we can close the menu and you can see that the color next to Fill has changed to blue. Time to draw the circle! Select the Circle tool, then go the canvas, click and hold your mouse, then draw a circle. Ok, that looks about right, so let’s release the mouse and there you go, our first blue circle is done! But immediately, I can see a problem: the circle has a black outline which I don’t like. I want to get rid of it! Now, we have also done this before, can someone still remember? Yes, right next to Fill is something called “outline”. And this is what determines how thick an outline of a shape is. Right now, the number is 4, meaning the outline it 4 pixels thick. If you don’t understand what a pixel is, no problem, just remember that the bigger the number, the thicker the outline. So what do think no outline should be? Yes, 0. So let’s change it to 0. Hmmm…but looks like the outline is still there? What are we missing? Aha, this is a very common mistake that people tend to make, if you want to change any shape on the canvas, it’s outline, color etc etc, you need to first make sure this shape is selected. How do we know a shape is selected? Yes, it is selected if there is a blue rectangle surrounding it. Do we have such blue rectangle here? No! So this shape is not selected, and surely any change you make is not going to affect it. So we need to select the circle first. This is simple, all you need to do is to choose this Select tool, and then click the circle. Now, do you see the blue rectangle? Yes, so the circle is now selected and we can make changes to it. Now, if we change the outline number to 0 again, boom, the outline is gone! Perfect!

* Ok, you might have probably noticed that our circle is not really a perfect circle: it’s a bit tall. So let’s delete it and try again. To delete a shape, make sure it is still selected, and then press the Del button on you keyboard. Boom, it’s gone! Now, choose the circle tool again, This time, I’m going to be very careful…and….yeah, does it look perfect now? Hmmm…I think this time it is a bit flat! Ha, annoying! So after a couple of tries, you might realize that it is actually very hard to draw a perfect circle, one that is not too tall and not too flat. So is there a way to draw a perfect circle easily? Fortunately, there is! Here is the trick: when you click and draw a circle, if you also hold down the SHIFT key on the keyboard at the same time, then the circle you draw is guaranteed to be a perfect one! Try it! See? It doesn’t matter what size it is, it is always going to be a perfect circle! And this works for other shapes as well. For example, you might have noticed that there is only a Rectangle tool but not a square tool. So how can we draw a perfect square? A square is just a rectangle with four equal sides, right? So same thing, select the Rectangle tool, when you draw it, hold down the SHIFT key, and now you have a perfect square! Cool, right? Ok, we don’t really need a square here, so let’s delete it.

* Now, for a costume, you normally would want to put it at the center of the canvas. Right now, our circle is clearly off center. Where is the center of the canvas? Yes, it’s this little target thing in the middle. Also notice that once the circle is selected, there is a small cross at its center, do you see that? Now, to place our circle at the center of the canvas, you just need to line up its cross with the target. So if we drag and move the circle towards the target, once it’s close enough, just let go of the mouse and it snaps right in! So our circle is now perfectly centered! We did this for each of our islands in Lesson 2 as well. 

* But I have not explained why doing this is important. Right, let’s do a small experiment, let’s move the circle off the center again. Now in the circle sprite’s property panel, change both its x and y coordinates to 0. We have said before that x0 and y0 is the center point of the stage, right? So you would assume that the blue circle should now be at the center of the stage. But take a look, it is certainly not the case, the circle is clearly not at the center. Why is that? Well, remember, we have just moved the circle off from the center of the canvas, so I guess this is probably the cause. As it turns out, when you tell the circle “go to x0 and y0”, it’s not the center of circle that goes there, it’s the center of the canvas, i.e. this little target here that goes there. So the center of the canvas is now lining up with the center of the stage. But where is the circle relative to the center of the canvas? Yes, it’s too the left. So this is going to be the same on the stage, the circle is to the left of the center of the stage. And that’s why it’s not at the center of the stage even though the sprite’s x and y coordinates are both 0. But when we make the circle’s center line up with the canvas center, whenever the center of the canvas goes to the center of the stage, so is the center of the circle. As you can now clearly see from the stage. The circle is right at the center. This is why we almost always make the center of the costume line up with the center of the canvas. But just like anything in life, there will always be exceptions, as we shall see later in this lesson. 

* Ok, I think the circle is a little too big. We have seen previously that you can change the sprite size with the “set size” code block. A different way is just to change it here in the costume editor. So let’s first select the circle, once the blue rectangle shows up, you can just click and drag those blue dots to change its size. The four blue dots on the top, bottom, left and right edges make the circle taller or flatter. But that makes our circle not perfect again. Another quick tip, if you make any change to the circle that you are not happy with, you can undo the change by press Ctrl+Z on your keyboard. Ok, here, I’m gonna undo a few times to go back. If we drag one of those four dots in the corners, we can make it bigger or smaller while still making sure it’s a perfect circle. So I think this looks about right. Of course, the circle is now off center, so let’s move it back to the center of the canvas again. Cool!

* Right, let’s click the Code tab and go back to the main editor. Time to add some set up code. Let’s first move the circle somewhere in the lower left corner. Just to be a bit more precise, let’s set the x coordinate to -210 and y coordinate to -150. Eventually, I want all five color circles to be lining up here. So let’s add a “When flag clicked block”, and then a “go to block ”. This makes sure that this blue circle will always start the this position when the app starts.

* Test. Ok, let’s give this a test, click the Go button and yep, it goes to the lower left corner. Cool! |
| More color circles | * Ok, so we have one color circle done. But there are four more to go: they are green, red, yellow and black. Now, we could go through the same process to create those four sprite: Choose “Paint”, draw a circle with the right size and color and place them at the right positions. What do you think about that? Do you think it would be a fun thing to do? Probably not. Because all the five color circle sprites are very similar, so we will just be repeating pretty much the same work over and over again. Is there a shortcut that we can take?

* The answer is Yes. When we code, it’s often the case that two or more sprites are very similar to each other, their costumes, their code etc etc. Instead of creating each sprite separately by repeating the same work again and again, we can actually make a copy of a sprite. So for the other color circle, we can start by copying them from the blue circle. The way to do it is to move your mouse to the sprite that you want to copy from, here it is the blue circle. Right click to open the menu, here the first option says “duplicate”. Now, “duplicate” has the same meaning as “copy”. So this means it is going to create an exact copy of the blue circle sprite. Let’s select that. Aha, now you can see a new sprite named “Blue2” is added to the sprite list. Now, I want you to take a look at the code and the costumes of these two sprites. Can you spot any differences? Try it! No, right, there is not a single difference between them! After all, this is what a copy of something is supposed to be! They are exactly the same! 

* Of course, we made a copy of the blue circle sprite to save us some repetitive work. But we don’t want them to be exactly the same. After all, this one is supposed to be the next color circle: the green color circle. Right, now a small challenge for you: can you find out all the places we need to change for this second sprite to turn it into a green color circle. Go head! Ok, what have you found? Yes, first thing, this is a green color circle sprite, so it’s name needs to be changed for sure. Let’s just call it Green. What else? Yes, it’s a green circle, so I guess its color should be green right? So let’s go to the costume editor. Since we are going to change the color of this circle, we need to make sure that the shape is selected first, once this is done, let’s open up the Fill menu, we need to play with the sliders again. For the “Color” slider, let’s move it to the green section, about here. Now I think it’s a bit too saturated, so I’m going to turn the Saturation slider down until about here. Yeah, I don’t think the brightness or opacity needs to be changed, so let’s just leave it like that. Right, if we go back to the main editor, we can see the Green circle on the stage now. Ok, what else do we need to change for this sprite?

* Test. Before answering that question, let’s click the Go button to see what is going to happen? Aha, the green circle is gone! What did it go? Yes, it went behind the blue circle! Why? Yes, take a look at both of their code, they all go to the same position, overlapping each other. So the final thing we need to change for the green circle is its starting position. 

* Now, we want all the color circles to line up at the bottom. This means, the green circle needs to have the same y coordinate as the blue circle, but its x coordinate needs to be move to the right. But by how much? I don’t know and we could try. How about moving 30 steps to the left? This means the x coordinate now needs to be -180.  Let’s run this script by clicking it. Aha, the green circle is back and now it’s to the right of the blue circle. But part of them are still overlapping, so we need to move it further to the right. How about moving 20 mores steps to the right? So the x coordinate becomes -160. Click the script again to run it. Yeah, I think this looks good! And we still have plenty of space for three more color circles! 

* Ok, three more color circles to go! Now, you should know what to do right? Simple make three copies of an existing circle and change their colors and positions. Right, so let’s have a 5 minute break and I will let you do that on your own. At the same time, I will also finish mine. Ok, off you go! 

* Ok, time’s up! Anyone has any problems? You all got it done! Very good! And I have mine done as well! Very cool! Looks like we can move on!  |
| Pencil (mouse following) | * Ok, all the colors are ready, but nothing can be drawn until we have a pencil! Let’s add that next! For the pencil sprite, we are going to choose it from the Scratch sprite library. So “Choose a sprite”, then type in “pencil” in the search bar, and click the sprite that comes up. 

* The pencil is a little too big, so let’s add a “When flag clicked” block, and set its size to about 60%. Click the script and yeah, the size looks good. Ok, now we need to think about how to draw with this pencil. In Microsoft Paint, once you select a color, you can then just go to the canvas, click and hold the mouse, then just move to draw lines. So we want our drawing app to work the same way. 

* Here, we not only have a mouse, but also a pencil sprite. Now, imagine the mouse as your hand, and we want this hand to hold the pencil so that the pencil goes to where ever our hand is. In other words, we want the pencil sprite to always go where ever the hand is or following the hand. But right now, when we move the mouse, the pencil is not going anywhere! 

* Ok, so far in this course, we have learnt two Motion blocks that help us to move a sprite to certain position on the stage, one of them is the “go to” block that can move a sprite to a specific x and y coordinates and the other one is the “go to random position” block that can place sprite randomly on the stage. But to make the pencil follow the mouse pointer, we need to be able to move a sprite to the mouse pointer. Ok, will there be a block for this? Let’s find out! Where should we look at? Yes, the Motion category! if you take a quick look, it does not seem to have any one that can move sprites to the mouse pointer. There is a one block called “point towards mouse-pointer”, but, simply pointing to the mouse pointer is not enough, we need to move there as well! Hmmm…are we out of luck this time? Ah, remember, there are a lot of good hidden stuffs inside the code block’s dropdown menus. Let’s take a look at the “go to random position” block. We have used this one before to move the ghost to random positions, right? Now, click open its dropdown menu. Oh, what do you see? Aha, yes, the second option says “mouse-pointer”. If we select that, where do you think the sprite is going to? Yes, the mouse pointer, because it now says “go to mouse-pointer”! I don’t think anything can be more obvious than that! Ok, let’s add that to our pencil script. 

* Problem: Test. Right let’s give this a test! Hmm…it’s funny. When we click the Go button, the pencil goes to the upper left corner of the stage. If we move it back to the center of the stage and click the Go button, then it goes to the upper left corner again! Why does it always go here? That’s weird! 

* OK, to understand that, let me ask you this question, what do you we use to click the Go button? Yes, the mouse pointer! So where was our mouse-pointer when we click the Go button? Yes, the upper left corner of the stage! Now, are you getting it? Yes, because the pencil is going to where the mouse pointer is, so it also goes to the upper left corner. As simple as that! Of course, the pencil cannot go outside of the stage, so it just got stuck there. Ok, that all clear now. But we still have a problem: the pen is not really following our mouse pointer at all. After clicking the Go button, if we move the mouse pointer somewhere else on the stage, the pencil did not keep on following at all. It still stays at the upper left corner! So what are we missing here? 

* Solution: Right, let me ask you a question: how many times has the pencil been told to go to the mouse pointer? Once, twice, three times or maybe more? Yes, only once! Take a look at the script, when flag is clicked, it goes to the mouse-pointer, which is at the upper left corner, and done, finished! But is our mouse still moving? Yes, our mouse is still moving freely on the stage. But unfortunately, our pencil script is already completed, so it won’t care where the mouse-pointer is anymore and happily sit at the corner for the rest of its life. You know seagull loves following fishing boats because that’s where they can get some free lunch. However, the fisherman are always moving the boat to places where they can catch more fish. So, for the seagull, they have to keep flying to where boat is if they want to keep getting those free lunches. The pencil is like the seagull and the mouse pointer is like the fishing boat: if the pencil wants to follow the mouse-pointer, it has to keep going to where the mouse pointer is again and again. It’s not enough to do it just once, twice or even 100 times, it needs to do that FOREVER! Right, forever, hmmm…does that ring a bell? Yes, we need a forever loop to make the the pencil goes to the mouse again and again, never stop! So what changes do we need to make to the script? Yes, we just need to put the “go to mouse pointer” block inside a forever loop!

* Test. Ok, let’s test this out! Aha, did you see that? It doesn’t matter where our mouse pointer go, the pencil always follow, just like a seagull following a fishing boat! This is so cool! Now we can draw anywhere we like!

* Now, before we move, that mistake we have just made is actually very common among new Scratchers. When you want to control the movement of a sprite, whether it is making it follow the mouse pointer, or use keyboard keys, you often need to put the blocks that move the sprite in a forever loop so that they can run again and again. Otherwise, if they just run once after the program starts, you will not be able to control the sprite later on. We will see more such examples later in the course, so just keep that in mind. |
| Pencil (Drawing) | * Ok, now the pencil that can go where ever our mouse pointer is. But it is not going a useful pencil without actually being able to draw anything! Let’s bring in the colors! 

*Ok, back in lesson 2 Treasure Hunt”, our explorer maps out the route to the treasure. Do you still remember what tool did we use to do that? Yes, we use a Scratch extension called “Pen”. Now, just as a quick reminder, an extension in Scratch is a collection of extra blocks beyond the standard ones to help you do even cooler stuffs! And the Pen extension is one of them. It allows us to draw on the stage! Hmm…this sounds like exactly what our pencil should do! So let’s bring in that extension first! Still remember how to add an extension? Well, on the left column of the editor, there is an icon that says “Extensions” when you hover your mouse over it. Click it and this brings you into the Extension library. Here, you will find a ton of interesting extensions that would allow you to do all sorts of crazy things. But we are not going to look at those in this introductory course because they are mostly for more advanced projects. But we definitely need the first Pen extension. Now, click the “Install” button, and once it turns grey and changes to “Installed”, we can go back to the main editor by clicking this “Code” icon, And now, a new block category that says “Pen” shows up in the code palette. So we have learnt how to use some of these blocks in Lesson2. If you can’t remember, don’t worry, because we are going to use them again here and you can refresh your memory. Also, we will be learning a few more new Pen blocks too!

* In lesson 2, our boat is the sprite that draws the route. Here, quite obviously, the pencil is going to be the sprite that draws. We already know that to make a sprite draw, it needs to put the pen down first with the “pen down” block, then moves around to draw a line and finally put the pen back up using the “pen up” block when it is done. So let’s use those blocks to make our pencil draw. 

* When the app starts, let’s first put the pen up because we are not ready to draw anything yet. So, just add the “pen up” block from the Pen Extension after the “set size” block.

* Test. Ok, let’s give this a test. Right, everything is the same as before, the pencil follows our mouse pointer and nothing is drawn on the canvas. That’s expected because we have just lifted the pen up!

* 

* Now, let’s say after going to a mouse pointer position, we have decided to put the pen down and start drawing. Now, in real life, you just put the pen down by make the tip of the pen touching the paper. In the program here, we put the pen down by clicking and holding the mouse, right? 

* Problem: Ok, so here we have two problems to solve: one is how to put the pen down and the second one is how to know when the mouse is being held down so that we can put the pen down. 

* Solution1: Ok, we already know how to put the pen up, so can you figure out yourself how to put it down? Yes, the “pen down” block in the pen extension, pretty easy huh? Let’s try to put it after the “go to mouse pointer” block.
* Test. Ok, now the pen starts drawing as soon as we click the green flag. The problem is that the pen is never up and will just keep drawing. Well, why is that? Well, because the “pen down” block is in a forever loop, meaning the pen is is gonna forever be down, so no wonder, right? But before we dive further, let’s first solve a small problem: now every time we start the program, what have drawn previously stays on the canvas. And as you draw more and more, this makes it look really messy. This just like some of the blocks in the Looks Category. For example, if you hide a sprite when you run the program, and then start the program again, the sprite will remain hidden. Do you still remember how we solve that problem? Yes, we show the sprite each time the program starts. So if we want to start with an empty canvas each time, what should we do? Yes, we should clear it when the program starts. And how do you clear a canvas? Yes, you use the “erase all” block from the pen extension. So let’s add that to the beginning. Ok, now each time we start the program, there is always an empty canvas. Cool.

* Solution2: Ok, we can now put the pen down to start drawing. But the problem is now the pen is always down, but we only want it to be down if the mouse is down. Ok, so we need to check if the condition “Is the mouse down?” is true or false. A condition, hmmm.. sounds familiar? Ok, time to recall from previous lessons: what kind of block in Scratch is a condition? Anyone? Yes, the diamond blocks! In lesson “Turtle Crossing”, we use diamond blocks in the Sensing category to check if a sprite is touching a color or another sprite. Right? Now, see if you can find a diamond that checks if the mouse is down or not. Yes, there is a “mouse down” diamond block and this is a condition if the mouse is true or false  if the mouse is up. Ok, also in the that lesson, we say that the diamond block in itself is gives true or false, they are only useful when other blocks use the true or false they give to decide what to do. For example, in the “Turtle Crossing” lesson, we used the “touching color” diamond block into a repeat until block, so that if the turtle in not touching the ocean blue color, we continue to repeat and move it forward; If the turtle is touching the ocean blue color, we finish the repeat loop and stop the game. Like in real life, we make decisions all the time, for example, if it rains tomorrow, then we will go to the museum, else we will go to play football. Here, if the mouse is down, then we put the pen down; else we put the pen up. So can you see the common pattern here? We always say something along the line of: if something happens, then we do something, else we do some other thing. Now, because we are making decisions all the time in coding, Scratch provides a block just for that: the “if then else” block in the control category. Like the “repeat until” block, this block also has a diamond shape hole where you can put any diamond blocks as conditions. Let’s put the “mouse down” diamond block in it. When we first introduced the “repeat” loop, we said that it looks like the head of a t-rex with its mouth wide open and you can put other blocks in to the mouth. Now the “if then else” block has two mouths, and you can put blocks in both of them. More formally, these two mouths are called the “if branch” and the “else branch”, because they are like a tree with branches leading into different directions. If the “mouse down” condition is true, then we run the blocks in the if branch, else, we run the blocks in the else branch. So now question for you: what blocks should we put into the if branch and what blocks should we put into the else branch? Yes, if mouse is down, we put the pen down, else, we put the pen up! Ok, now instead of always putting the pen down in the forever loop, we make our decision based on whether the mouse is down or not.

* Test. Now, if we do not hold the mouse down, nothing will be drawn on the canvas. We can only start drawing with we hold the mouse down. Perfect! |
| Pencil tip | * Now before we move on to select different colors for drawing, let’s first solve a small problem. When we draw right now, the line actually comes out from the middle of the pencil. But you have drawn and written using any pen before, you know that the line should actually come out from the tip of the pencil. And we should do the same in our paint program too.
* So first go to the costume tab of the pencil sprite, there are two costumes. We don’t need the second one, so just delete it. Also notice that, if you click the pencil’s costume, you are selecting different bits of it, for example, the tip here, the body here, and the eraser here. This is because the pencil is not created as a whole, but formed by joining different parts together. Also, if you accidentally move a part, just pressed Ctrl+Z to undo the change. Now because there are many parts, so moving the pencil in the paint window can be a bit difficult, because you have to move them one at a time and then resemble them together again. Yeah, you can see how difficult it is. Now Ctrl+Z a couple of times to undo all the changes. So to make the different parts of the pencil become a whole, what you can do is to group them. All you need to do is to select all the parts, this can be done by choose the selection tool, then go to any where in the paint window, click and drag out a rectangle, and make sure all parts of the pencil are inside this rectangle, then release the mouse, and you have all the parts selected. Now go to the top the pain editor, you will find a little “Group” icon, just click that, now all the parts are grouped together and you can move the pencil around as one single part. Now, of course, you can always ungroup it by just selecting the costume, and click the little “Ungroup” icon and it becomes individual parts again. For what we need to do next, I’m gonna group it as it will make things a lot easier. 
* Now let’s first try to understand why the line is coming out from the middle of the pencil. When we ask the pencil to “go to mouse pointer”, what is actually at the mouse pointer is the center of the pencil’s costume. When we start drawing, the line always comes out from that center. Now, can you see where the center of the pencil’s costume is? Yes, the center is this little cross here, and the cross is at the middle of the pen. No wonder why the line comes out from there. So, if we want to make the line comes out from the tip, what do you think we should do? Yes, we should make the tip of the pen as the center of its costume. How can we do that, well simple, just move the costume up so that its tip is roughly at the cross here. 
* Test. Now when we draw, the line comes out from the tip of the pencil, and it feels more like how we would actually draw in real life. Awesome!
* What we do here is re-centering the costume, because we use a different point of the costume as its center. We don’t normally do that, but sometime they can be useful or even necessary, as in this case here. |
| Default color | * OK, now we can draw, but we cannot draw with different colors, and after all, this is what all those color circles are here for. So let’s work on that next!
* Right now, we are only drawing with a deep blue color. So first of all, when the program starts, we want to set the pen color to our lighter blue here. Any idea how to set the color of your pen? Yes, the “set pen color to” block is your friend. So let’s use that at the beginning. Now, notice that there is a color bubble in this block. Hmmm… I think we have seen a similar bubble somewhere else? Can you recall that? Yes, in lesson “Turtle Crossing”, when we use the “touching color” block, there is also a color bubble. Remember what is that for? Yes, it allows us to choose the color the turtle wants to touch. So, here in the “set pen color to” block, it allows us to choose the color of the pen we want to draw with. Actually, the color bubble is pretty common in Scratch, and every time you see it, you can use it to choose a color.
* Ok, let’s open up the color menu, again we can use the “Color”, “Saturation” and “Brightness” sliders to create the color we want. But here, we are not going to create any blue color, we want exactly the color of this blue circle. So how can you select and exact color from the stage? Yes, we can use the color picker! Now the mouse becomes a magnifying glass and all we need to do is to move it to the blue circle and click, voila, the color in the “set pen color to” block is exactly the same as the blue circle. Cool!
* Test. Now if we draw again, see? The color of the lines is the same as the blue circle. Perfect! |
| Color Selection | * Ok, so the pen starts with the blue color. But we also want to be able to select all these other colors. Let’s go back to the Windows Paint program, so how would you select a different color there? Well, you move your mouse to the color square you want, and just click it. Then you can draw with that color, simple as that. So, we will mimic that our paint program too.
* So if we move our mouse to the green circle and click, the pen’s color should now change to green. So essentially, when the green circle is click, it needs to tell the pencil “Hey, please switch to green”. So question for you: how can the green circle sprite send a message and tell the pen to change its color to green? Any idea? Yes, in the last lesson “Knock-knock”, we have learnt two very important blocks: “broadcast“ and ”when I received“, with these two blocks you can send messages between different sprites so that one can ask the other to do something.
* So, here, who is sending the message? Yes, the green circle! So let’s broadcast a message there. What message to send? Well you could come up with any message you want, but because this is telling the pen to switch to green color, so I’m just gonna name the message “switch to green”. Ok, now who is the message receiver? Yes, then pen! So let’s go back to the sprite, and When I receive “switch to green”, the pen needs to set its color to green. So how do you set the color of the pen? Yes, use the “set pen color to” block, this time we are going to use the color picker to select from the green circle. Boom! That’s done!
* Test. Ok, initially, it’s blue, and we go to the green circle and click. Hmm….it’s still blue. Why? Can anyone see that went wrong? Yes, the green circle just broadcasts “switch to green” message, but it never says when to send that message. So when do you think we should send it out? Yes, when this sprite is clicked. So let’s add a when this sprite is clicked hat block.
* Test. Choose green, now the pen draws with green color. Perfect.
* Ok, so we are going to have 5 min break, and I want you to finished the code for the other four colors. 
* Ok, times up let’s check to see if we all get it right.
* Test. Cool |
| Changing pencil’s costume | * Ok, now we can draw with different colors. But it will be even better if every time we select a new color, the pencil itself changes to that color too. So that we can immediately tell what color we are drawing with right now. For this, we will create different costumes for the pencil sprite, one for each color. Let’s see how to do it.
* Now go the the pencil’s costume tab. Right now, there is just one costumes and it’s yellow. So let first change this one to the first color blue. Choose the selection tool in the toolbox, click and select the body part of the costume. Now here we need the parts to be separate because we just want to change the color of the body and not the whole pencil. Once the body is selected, open the Fill menu, we are going to set its color to the color of the blue circle. By now, you should already know that every time you want to set something to the exact color of another thing, always look for the color picker. And there is a color picker here too. So select that and move to the blue circle and click. Boom! The pen become blue. So cool! And also, let’s rename this costume to “blue pencil”.
* Now, let’s create more costumes for different colors. Right click on the current costume, and select duplicate. A new costume is created. Let’s first rename it to “green pencil”, and we do the same trick to set its body’s color to the color of the green circle. And we just do the same for the other three pencil costumes. 
* Ok, so we have five costumes for the five colors. Now, every time we set the pencil color, we change its costume too. Where do we change the pencil’s color? Yes, all the scripts here. So let’s change them one by one. Also remember when the program starts, the color is initially blue, so let’s set its costume to “blue pencil” as well.
* Test. Now, each time we change color, the pencil changes to the corresponding color as well. Nice! |
| Eraser | * Ok, what if we made a mistake and want to erase some part of it? Well any Paint program includes some kind of eraser that allows you to erase some part of the image in case you made a mistake. So for example, in the Windows Paint program, you can click the eraser here to erase what you have just drawn.
* So let’s add an eraser for our paint program too. First add a new eraser sprite by uploading an image from the Resources folder. It is too big now, so let’s shrink it down to about the same as the color circles. When the program starts, let’s move it to the lower right corner by going to x 140 and y -150.
* Let’s first think about how we can erase something on the canvas. Any idea? So let me ask you, what color is the canvas? White right? Now what happen if we use a white color pen to draw on it? Yes, you will not be able to see the line because it is the same color as the canvas. So can you figure out how to erase things now? Yes, we can draw with a white color pen, and it will cover that’s already on the canvas with white, essentially erasing things.
* Now, we also want to click the eraser to select it. Can you figure out how to switch the pen color to white? Let’s have a 5 min break and we will work on that together. Ok, time’s up. Ok it is not that different from what we have for the color circles. When the eraser is clicked, it broadcasts a message saying ”Switch to eraser”. Now, when the pencil receives this message, we set its color to White by using the color picker and click anywhere on the canvas
* Test. Now when we click the eraser, the color essentially becomes white and if we draw with that, you can see we are slowly erasing previous lines. 
* It will be better if we also change the costume of the pencil to an eraser to make it clear that we are not drawing now. Previously, whenever we click a color circle, the pencil changes to  a costume that has the same color as the circle being selected. When we click an eraser, how can we change the pencil to an eraser? Yes, this is just another costume of the pencil! Instead of being a different color pencil, this costume be our eraser here. 
* So let’s add that costume to the pencil sprite by selecting the eraser image once again from our Resources folder. Resize it to about the same size as the eraser sprite. When the pencil receives ”switch to eraser” message, switch the costume to “eraser”.
* Test. Now when we click the eraser, the pencil becomes an eraser and this feel more like we are erasing something. Cool. Let’s draw more with the red pencil.
* Problem: oooops, there is a problem, when we move the eraser to the red circle and try to click it, nothing happens! Why? Does anyone know why? Well, when we are using the eraser,  take a look at where the mouse pointer is? Yes, it is in the middle of the eraser. So, when we move the mouse pointer and the eraser over the red circle and click, which sprite do you think we are actually clicking? Yes, we always click the eraser costume and never the red circle because the read circle is hidden behind the eraser costume! So what do you think we can do to be able to actually click the red circle? Hint, we have done similar thing when try to reposition the tip of the pencil. 
* Solution: Yes, let’s go to the Pencil’s costume tab and find the eraser costume. Now select the costume and you will see that the center is in the middle of the eraser, and this is also where the mouse pointer is. So if we want the mouse to be at the head of the eraser, all we need to do is just move this costume down a little bit, so that its head is at the center instead.
* Test. Now we can use the eraser, and then select a different color pencil to draw again. Nice! |
|  | *Problem: Now we can erase what have been drawn. But you can see that this is very slow. You have to erase it again and again to get a clean canvas. To make things faster, we need a bigger eraser! Now you might think to get a bigger eraser, we just need to increase the size of its costume. Would that work? What do you think? Now think about it, as we have seen, the eraser is just a white pencil right? Now, with a pencil, you can draw very thin lines or you can draw very thick lines. So if we want to make our eraser bigger? Do you think we need thinner lines or thicker lines? Yes, we need thicker lines. So now the question becomes, how can you change the thickness of the lines drawn by our pencil? Maybe a place to start look is the Pen extension. See if you can find something useful?
* Solution: Ok, I hear someone says the “set pen size to” block. Yes, this is exactly the block we need. It changes the thickness of the lines being drawn by the pencil. So, when the pencil receives “switch to eraser” message, let’s set its size with this block to, errr, let’s try 50.
* Test. Ok, we start by drawing some lines. Now, let’s select the eraser, WOW, is become so much quicker to erase everything! So Cool! 
* Problem: Now if we run the program again and start drawing, you can see that the blue line become so thick! And why is that? Well, just like what we have seen previously with some of blocks in the Looks category, such show and hide, if you hide a spite when you run the program, you need to remember to show it again at the beginning, otherwise, the sprite will still be hidden. So same reason here, when we use the eraser and set the pen size to 50, and if we run the program again, the pen size will still be 50, and that’s why it is so thick. 
* Solution: So the solution is to remember to reset the pen size back to 1 when the program starts. We use the “set pen size to 1” block after the set pen color to block.
* Test. Now we first draw something, then erase it. Stop the program, and start again. This time, the pen size is still one, so we are not drawing those super thick lines. |
| Clear all | * Ok, we can erase things now. But as you can see, this is kind of slow. If you want to erase a small part of your image, using an eraser is fine. But what if I just want to remove everything on canvas? Would it be nice if I can just click one button and we are back to an empty canvas? What would super convenient.
* So, so let’s add a “Clear” button by selecting the Cross image from our Resources folder. When the program starts, let’s move it to x 200 and y -150, right next to the eraser. Now, when this sprite is clicked, we want to clear the canvas completely. We already know how to clear the canvas right? We have done this at the beginning of the program: it’s the “erase all” block. So here, when the cross sprite is clicked, we just need to run this block again the clear the canvas. 
* Test. Let’s draw something, now click the Cross. Boom! Everything is gone! Perfect!  |
| Change pen size/width | * Ok, by this point, our Paint program is almost finished. But there is one more change I want to make: in the Windows Paint program, you can change the width of the pen. If you go in there, you can change its width to different thickness. It goes from very thin line to very thick line. So I want to add this to our Paint program too!
* When we add the eraser, we have already seen how to change the width of a pen by setting its size value using the “set pen size to” block. We can use the same trick to change the width of our color pen. So let’s add a “set pen size to” block after the “set pen color to” block at the beginning of the program. So the number we pass in right now is 1.
* Test. Let’s draw and as before, you see a very thin blue line. 
* Now, let’s stop the program, change the number to 30.
* Test. Wow, now you can see a very thick line.
* Problem: Now it’s very often that we switch between different line thickness when we draw a picture. But here we have a problem: Let’s say after drawing with the very thick pen, I want to change to a thinner one. However, there is no way for me to do that. Remember the Windows Paint program, you can just click the dropdown and change to a different thickness. But here, we have no choice but to stop the program, go into the code, change the size in the “set pen size to” block and start the program again. Now, this is not just super inconvenient, the bigger program is that, after restarting the program, we have lost everything we drew 5 mins ago. Ouch! So we need a width that can be changed at any time when we are drawing. For this, we need to introduce Variable. If you take a look at the code block Palette, you will see a Variables category with a few new blocks. |
| Variable | * First of all, what is a variable?  You can think of a variable as a box. You can put anything into that box. In real life, this would be things like fruit, snacks or toys, whatever. Now, the reason it’s called “variable” is because what is inside that box can be changed at any time. So for example, you may initially have 5 toy cars in box, then you can add one more and have 6 cars. You can also take out 4 cars and then leave with 2 cars.  You can even dump out all the cars, and put chocolate bars inside instead. So no only the number of things can change, the things themselves can be changed too! Now, image you have a few of those boxes, each look the same from the outside, it can be hard to tell which one stores what, just imagine trying to find the box will all the toy cars. So this is where a “label” comes in pretty handy. All you need to do is just to stick a label onto the box and write down that is inside on the label, so for the toy cars, you may just write “toy cars” onto the label. 
* Ok, enough of analogies, let’s come back to the world of Scratch. In Scratch, we also want to store things somewhere all the time. And the boxes we use are called “variable”. The word “vary” means “change”, so “variable” mean “things that can change”. Instead of storing toy cars or chocolate bars, variables are used to store numbers or text, which we shall soon see. Now, you can create a variable by clicking this “Make a variable” button, this pops up a small window called “New Variable”. The first thing it asks you to give is the name of the variable. Still remember the label analogy in the box example? So here, the name of a variable is gonna be a label for it, because very often people will create a lot of variables in their programs, so to be able to quickly find a specific variable, just like when you want to find the box with all the toy cars, we need to give the variable a name. Because here, we are creating this variable to store the width of our pen, so we will just name it “width”. Ok, after giving the variable a name, you can then select one of these two options here: “For all sprites” and “For this sprite only”. Which one you choose here doesn’t matter, but the difference between them is actually very important and we will explain them in detail later on in the course. For now, just leave it at “For all sprites”. Then click OK.
* After that, you will see a new variable showing up in the variable list here. Also, notice that there is a checkbox next to the variable that can be turned on/off. If it is on, the variable Ok, just to recap, we have created a variable or a box to store the width of our pen, and we have given it a name or a label called “width”. 
* We now have box ”width“, what do we put inside? Well, we put the width of the pen. So what is a width of a pen? Well, its just a number, right? Previously, we set the size of the pen to 1 and 30, so they are just numbers. So how do we put a number into the “width” box? We use the “set width to” block. This block has a dropdown list, you can select a variable created earlier from the list. For our project, there is just one, the ”width“ variable. You can also change the name of the variable by selecting “rename variable” or delete the variable. You can set the variable to anything, or using our box analogy, you can put anything into the box, and this is called the value of the variable. So for width, we want to set it to a number, the bigger the number, the thicker the line. So when the program starts, let’s set the width to 1.
* Test. Ok, let’s make the variable visible on the stage by checking the box and start the program. Now, we can see that “width” is indeed one.
* Ok, a nice thing about variable is that, once it has been created and set to some value, you can use it in other blocks. Using the box analogy again, after putting all the toy cars into a box, if one of your friends ask to borrow them, you can just hand the whole box over to them. So instead of setting the pen size to 30 here, we can use the “width” variable instead and this is the same as setting the pen size to one. It’s as if your friend opens up the box you gave and takes out all the cars. 
* Test. We now draw with a pen size of one. Stop the program, and change the value passed to “set width to” block to 30, run again, we now draw with a pen size of 30. Ok, you might be asking, what does all these buy us? Because obviously we still have the same problem as before, that is we need to stop the program, change the width, start the program again and loses everything drew before? So why bother?
* Well, the magic of using a “width“ variable is that you can now change the width without stopping and restarting the program! But how? Well, we will show one way of doing it and will leave the other way as an exercise for you to try.
* Now move your mouse to the “width variable” on the stage and right click, a menu pops up which contains different options for displaying the variable. There is a “normal readout”, which is just what the variable looks like right now. Then there is the “large readout”, and if you choose that, the variable name disappears, leaving only the number with a slightly bigger size. And you can switch back by choosing the “normal readout”. Now there is a third option called the “slider”. If you choose this, the width becomes a slider. Now you can slide and change the value from to 100. Of course, if this is not the range you want, you can change it by right clicking the variable again, then the menus now contains an extra option, “change slider range”, choose that, and a small window pops up. Here, you can set the minimum and maximum values for the range. Let’s say we want the pen’s width to vary between 1 and 30. So lets put one into the “Minimum Value” text box and 30 into the “maximum value” text box. Now, if you slide it again, you can see it goes from 1 to 30. And, so we can change the width of the pen! Let’s try it!
* Test. 
* Problem: Hmmm…so seems that doesn’t matter what value we choose for width, the pen’s size stay the same and does not change at all! Why?
* Solution: Ok, where do we set the pen size? Yes, at the beginning of the program. What size do we set it to? Yes, 30, because we set variable ”width“ to 30 at the start. Now, let me ask you a question: do we ever change the pen size afterwards? No, can you see another “set pen size to” block anywhere in our program? No, I can see none! So how can you expect the pen size to be changed from 30. But I think you will argue by saying: “But I did slide the “width” variable and change its value to, say one, why has that not changed the pen size?” Yes, you have changed the value of the “width” variable, no doubt about that. But that updated “width” variable is not been used by a “set pen size to” block to update the pen size too. Remember, you only set the pen size to 30 once and only once at the beginning of the program! So what do you think we should do? Yes, we just need to set the pen size again and again forever! So if the value of “width” changes, this updated value will be use immediately to set the pen size. So we all know how to do things again and again forever non-stop right? Yes, use a forever loop. So we add another “when flag clicked” block, and here we forever set the pen size to “width”.
* Test. So the width is now 30. But watch, if slide it to 15 and draw again, the line become thinner. If we slide it all the way to 1 and draw, the line becomes really thin. So we can change to any number in the range as we wish without having to change the code and restart the program, and surely we are not losing any paining this time. Perfect! |
| Fix bug | * Ok, we are now drawing with a blue pen of size 30. But notice what happens when I select a different color: When I click the red circle to switch a red pen, the pen changes fine, but at same time, we saw that a big red dot has been drawn on the canvas too. That’s not good. 
* So essentially we can think the bottom part, where all the color circles, eraser and clear button are, is not part of canvas and therefore should not be drawn on. They are the controls just like the controls in the Windows Paint Program up top.
* If we move our mouse pointer just above that area, we can see that the y position is roughly -110. So the control area is this rectangle. If our mouse moves beyond y -110, we should not let the user draw anything.
* Ok, when can the user draw anything? Yes, it’s when they put the pen down. And how do they put the pen down, yes, when the mouse is down here. So right now, as long as the user put the mouse down, the pen is down and they can draw, doesn’t matter where the mouse pointer. So to limit where they can draw, we only put the pen down if: 1) the mouse is down, which is what we have already been checking here and, an extra condition, the y value of the mouse pointer is greater than -110. Meaning it is above the control area. Ok, so let’s me say that again:  we only put the pen down if the mouse is down AND the y value of the mouse pointer is greater than -110.
* We are already checking the mouse down condition. Let’s see how to check if mouse y is greater than -110. How do we know the y value of the mouse pointer? In the Sensing category, there are two blocks “mouse x” and “mouse y” and they tell you the x and y values of your mouse pointer. So we have the y value of the mouse, now next how do we check if it is greater than -110? Well, if you have learnt any basic maths, you know how to compare two numbers using the >, < or = operators, right? Unsurprisingly, Scratch also provides those operators in the, guess what, the Operators category, right here. So you can put numbers or other blocks into the two bubbles for comparison. Here we would like to check if the y value of a mouse is greater than -110, so we will use the greater than operator, put “mouse y” on the left and type in -110 on the right. There you go, we are checking if mouse y is greater than -110.
* Now we have both conditions: mouse down and mouse y greater than -110. Remember, we only put the pen down if both conditions are true. So for example, our parents will often say something like this to us: you can go play with your friends if you have had your dinner AND finished your homework. So we use AND to join both conditions to mean that both of them have to be true for us to do something. Now back to the code, if you take a look at the Operators category again, right below the comparison operators, you will see “and”, “or” and “not”, and these are called “logical operators”, use to join more than one conditions to create a more complex condition  We are going to use the “and” block here and will learn about the other two later in the course.
* Notice that that the “and” has two diamond shape holes, meaning you can put two other conditions in it. And our “mouse down” and “great than” are conditions. So let’s put them into the “and” block. And the “and” block now becomes a more complex condition, we can use it in the “if then else” block so that we only put the pen down if the mouse is down AND mouse y is greater than -110. 
* Test. Now, we can still draw on the canvas, but not in the control area at the bottom. And if we select different color circles, or the eraser, we are not drawing anything the stage any more. Perfect! |

### Exercises

- Add thickness icons to click and change width variable.