# 0 Welcome (old)

### Key Points

- Intro to programming and Python
- Local IDE MU
- Online IDE Replit
- comment
- first impression of function
- parameters
- print
- string

| Steps  | Notes |
| --- | --- |
| Opening words | * Ok everyone, welcome! For those of you who have not met me before, my name is Jing, the founder of Coderland. And I will be your teacher, your guide and your friend in this wonderful coding journey we are about to start! This course is all about Python, one of the most popular programming languages in the world. We will be learning the basics as well as creating a series of fun and exciting projects together! There will be drawings, apps, and games, and I can’t wait to show you how fun it is to play with Python. So let’s dive right in!  |
| Introduction to coding Python | * Ok, first thing first, what is “coding” or “programming” after all? You probably hear people talking about “coding” all the time, and it might seen a bit mysterious or even daunting! But it is not! Look at the world around you, there are computers all over the place: the laptop sitting on your desk, the smartphone in your hand, and if you have the money, maybe even an Apple Vision Pro on your head. All these devices look very different, but they are essentially all computers. Computers are useful, they can help us browser the internet, order food, learning online etc etc. But computers are really dumb, they are just a bunch of chips and wires under the hood. If they are so dumb, how can they do such amazing things for us?
* Well, they are dumb, but we humans are smart, right? So we can tell the computers what to do. And the reason we ask computers to do it instead of ourselves is because, and here’s the biggest advantage of computers, once they know what to do, they can do it really fast, I mean, really fast, blazingly faster, faster than any human can ever possibly imagine. So we combining the best of both worlds: the creativity and logical thinking of human and the super power of computers.
* When you ask someone to do something, you need to speak a certain language, right? For example, if I want you to get me some water, in English, I would say “Please give me a bottle of water!” In Chinese, I would say “请给我一瓶水”. Same with computer, if want it to do something for us, we need to speak to it in a certain language as well. And the language we speak to a computer is called “Coding Language” or “Programming Language” and the act of speaking that language is called “Coding” or “Programming”. This is how we communicate to a computer so that it can understand what we want. That’s it, that’s what coding is all about! 
* Ok, when you learn a language, you start with words, and then use words to compose sentences, and then use sentences to write articles etc etc. It gets bigger and bigger. Same with programming languages, we first learn the basic bits and pieces, for those of you who come from a Scratch background, you must be familiar with all the different blocks. Then we use these blocks to create large scripts. More formally, we call such scripts “programs” because they are created from a programming langauge.
* Now, we all know that there are a lot of different languages, like Chinese, English, French, Spanish etc. In fact, according to Wikipedia, there are more than 7000 languages in the world today. That’s insane! In the world of computer, there are also a lot of programming languages. Scratch is one of them, it’s designed specifically for young kids to talk to a computer, and because of that, it’s very visual, easy to use, as fun as playing LEGO bricks. Ok, but there are more programming languages out there, and Python, the one we are going to learn a lot in this course, is definitely one of the most popular choices.  It was created by Guido van Rossum in the 1990s, and because of its simplicity, powerful tools and great support, it soon took over the world and used everywhere to create all kinds of fun and useful programs.
* While Scratch is very visual and use colorful code blocks to write a program, Python is a what we called a “text-based” programming language. Meaning you write code using words, numbers and symbols, all typed in from the computer’s keyboard. This is big shift from the block-based Scratch and a big step towards becoming a more serious coder! But, please don’t let that put you off. If you have learnt Scratch before, you will find that a lot of concepts in Python are exactly the same despite looking very different. It’s like even though English and Chinese look very different, but as long as you understand the basic words and grammars of both languages, you can express the same idea in either one, like “get me a bottle of water”. For does of you who have not learnt Scratch before, no need to worry either. Because I would not assume any previous coding experience, and we will start from the very basics and build from there!
* So this is all out of the way, and let’s get out hands dirty and start play with Python now!   |
| Two different ways to write Python programs | * OK, to start writing Python programs, we first need an editor to write and run our code. If you have learnt Scratch before, you know that there are two ways to use such an editor: the first one is to to download and install an offline code editor. There are a couple of choices here, the most popular ones are the official Scratch Editor and Turbowarp. The second way is to use an online editor in a browser. The most popular ones are again the Scratch official one and Gandi.
* There are pros and cos of both approaches, an offline editor is not affected by the internet connection. In fact, you can write code using it without internet at all, and hence the name “offline editor”. Whereas if you use a online editor and have bad internet connection, the experience is not going to be very pleasant. On the other hand, the biggest advantage of an online editor is that you can access your program and code anywhere as long as you have an internet connection. And it’s is also easier to shared and collaborate with other people online.
* Here, I will show you both ways, offline and online. But because I want it to be easier to share our projects and collaborate with one another, I would choose the second way through the entire course. |
| Offline Editor: MU | * Ok, when it comes to offline editor, there are a lot of choices. Some are very powerful and some are less so. Some are complicated to learn and some are very easy to begin with. 
* For this simple simple introduction, I choose the beginner friendly Python code editor called “MU”, that is the two letters “M” and “U”. To get it, type in the URL “codewith.mu” into your browser. This brings you to the MU’s homepage. Here, you can find all sorts of information about this editor, for example, there is a tutorial section with many small lesson to show you how to use MU. If you are interested, you are encouraged to take a look at those tutorials after class. 
* As a first step, we would like to download and install the editor. Click the “Download” section and it brings you to the download page. Base on your operating system, you can choose the appropriate installer. Because I’m using a Windows PC, so I will download the Windows Installer. Just click the green “download” button and it starts the download. Once it finishes, go to the “Download” folder and  you will see a file called “MUEditor-win64” something like that. Double click this file will start the installation process. Check “I accept the terms in the License Agreement” and then click “Install”. It is going to take a while to install MU onto you computer. Once it’s done, leave the option “Launch Mu Editor” checked and then click “Finish”. This would then start the editor. Now it might take a while if this is the first time you use Mu. Just be patient and it should be done in a few minutes. Now we have Mu open in front of us. Mine is in Chinese because it uses the system language of my Windows operating system, which is also Chinese. I have not figured out a way to change it to English so let’s stick with Chinese for the time being.
* Ok, at the top of the editor, there are buttons for various different things. We don’t need them all and I will just explain those that we need. I always like my editor having a darker theme because that makes my eye hurt less when I staring at the screen for a long time. So the first thing I would do is to click the “Theme” button to toggle between different color themes. There are three options: light, grey and dark. Which one to choose is totally up to you, I like the grey one.  |
| Offline editor: interactive mode | * Next, there are two different ways you can write and run Python code. The first one is called the “interactive mode”. See this “REPL” button with a keyboard icon here? Click it and you have a window showing up at the bottom with some message which can be ignored. This window is called a “REPL”, which is an acronym for Read, Evaluate, Print and Loop. You don’t need to understand what that means, just think of it as a chat window to talk to Python. Of course, the language you use is going to be computer code. You can type in code here after the “In [1]:”. By the way, this is called a “Prompt”, which is something on the screen that shows the computer is ready to receive your input or instruction. Once you type in code and hit the “return” key on your keyboard, Python would then run it and give you a response right away, just like chatting with someone. 
* Let try this out! When people first pick up any new programming language, the very first program they tend to write is called the “Hello, world!” program. This basically just tells the computer to output a message “Hello, World!” to the screen. It’s just a way to show that everything is setup and working perfectly, and also let the computer shows a nice welcoming message. OK, let’s do it in Python. To show a message on the screen, we use a “print” function. Ok, don’t worry about what a function is if this is new to you. We will come back to that later in the lesson. So in real life, what does it mean to print something? Well, usually you use a printer to print either text or images onto a piece of paper, right? Now, think about this “print” function as a printer, and we give it some text to print to the computer screen instead of a piece of paper. How do we give it some text? Well, we first type in a pair of brackets, and then inside, add a pair of double quotes, and finally inside those quotes, we add the sentence “Hello, World!”. Ok, this is the Python way of telling the computer to show a message “Hello, World!” on the screen. Now, if all these brackets and double quotes make you scratch your head, don’t worry, we will explain all of them later on. For now, it’s enough to just know that this shows a message. Ok, now, hit return,  voila, we see the message being printed on the screen by Python. Then we see a new prompt waiting for the next input from us. 
* Let’s see one more example. A lot of people I know use Python as a calculator, because you can do pretty much all kinds of math calculations. For example, in the next prompt, if I type in “1+2” and hit return, see, Python immediately gives you the result back, which is “3”. Also notice that the prompt as change from “In [2]” to “Out[2]”, and the Out here stands for “output”, meaning this line is the output result for the input above. You can perform other calculations such as, subtraction, multiplication and division. Again, we will dive deeper into Python’s operations on numbers later in the course.
* Ok, what we have seen here is just a very small portion of what Python is capable of. But the point here is just to show how to use the editor, and we will explore the real power of Python itself throughout the entire course. |
| Offline editor: script mode | * Ok, as we can see, the interactive REPL is a very convenient tool to quickly run and try out small bits of code. But the biggest downside is that it has no memory, meaning if I close the editor and reopen it to print “Hello, World!” again, I have to type everything again. It’s ok for our little tiny toy program with just a single print. Unfortunately, real python programs can be huge with lots and lots of code. Now imagine having to type all these code again and again each time you run the program. This is going to drive you crazy! Luckily, there is second way to write and run a python program: the script mode.
* Let's first close the REPL by clicking this button again. Now, to start using script mode, we are going to create a script file that will contain the entire program. This can be done by clicking the button with the “+” sign. Ok, now MU opens up a new blank file for us. This is the name of the file, but because we have not given it any name, it says “untitled” now. This large area here is where you would type in your python program, as can be seen from this “message” here. Since it is only here to tell you want to do, we can delete it. Now, notice that once we change the file, there is a new red dot next to the name of the file, this means the file has been changed. Also, on the left column, there are numbers, and they are all “line numbers”. This is because Python code are often written line after line, so having some number here can help you to more easily find where a piece of code is.
* OK, in this blank file, we can type in as many code as we want, depending on how complex the program is. For example, let’s print “Hello, World!” again. Type in print, brackets, quotes and “Hello, World!” Notice that as you type, MU is constantly giving you pop up windows with some hint and messages. You might now understand them now. But as you get more and more familiar with Python, these are actually very useful information. But we will ignore them for now. Ok, now, if I hit return, see, nothing happens. This is one of the biggest difference between the interactive and script mode. In script mode, the code will not be run as you type. So it’s not a conversation any more. It’s more like you sit in your room writing a big article and not show it to anyone. It’s only after you have finished, that you give it to someone to read. This means you can write a lot of code before running it. Now, we are done here, this is a very simple program with just one line of code, how do we run it now? Easy! Do you see the button with a big triangle that says “run”? Click it.
* 

Once finished, you then run the entire program in one go. And the best thing is that you can now save all the code into a file on your computer.  |
| Two different ways to write Python programs | * Local IDE (VS code, pycharm, mu)
* Online IDE (replit) |
| codewith.mu | * How to download and install
* Different modes (we will just use standard Python mode)
* Open and save files
* Print “Hello World” and run

Ok, let’s take a closer look at the “print” here. Since the day when Python was born, its creator realized that there are certain common things that people would like to do very often in their programs. One of those things is to dump something to the screen for user to see, whether it’s some message or computation results. And here it is, “print”. In Python’s terminology, this is call a “function” and using a function is often referred to as “calling a function”. So here we are “calling print”. Now, different functions have different names and do different things, and this one whose name is “print” happens to output something to the screen. There is also one thing you need to pay attention to, when calling a function: you always need to follow the function name by a pair of brackets. Depending on the function, you might or might not give it any information in between those brackets. For example, we pass a message “Hello World” to the “print” function and it displays that on the screen. More formally, what you pass to a function between its brackets is called a “parameter”, it’s a piece of information that you give to a function to use. Ok, if all this makes you a bit confusing, don’t worry, we are only at the very first lesson, and we will have much more to say about functions in the future. Because this is such an important concepts in Python, and in fact, it pretty much exists in all programming languages. Even in Scratch! Can you believe that? For the “print” function, do you thing we a something similar in Scratch? Yes, it’s the “say” block which makes the sprite to say something on the screen. And the words being said are just parameter given to the “say” block! How cool is that!   

From the run result, we can see that it outputs a message to the user. 

* Interactive mode with REPL
* Change theme
* Different potential errors with “print” (missing quotes, missing brackets, unmatching quotes, use upper case “P” for “print” etc) 

 |
| Replit (Preferred way) | * Sign up and login
* Select and Change Theme
* “Create Repl” button. Explain what “Repl” means. Choose “Python” as language. Give the repl a name. Then click “Create” to create a new repl
* Area where to write code
* “Run” button
* Program output is shown in the “Console” window
* Left side, “File” and “Tools”
* Comparison between Scratch editor and Replit: login, mystuffs
* Encourage to explore
* Set indentation to “4”
* Set wrapping to “none”
* Extensions: Prettier

* Print “Hello world” |