# 12 Fruitopia

[Projects | Computer coding for kids and teens | Raspberry Pi](https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/next-customer-please)

[Supermercado on Scratch (mit.edu)](https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/780019323/editor/)

### Objectives

### Background

**First-person view** means that you don’t see your character on the screen, instead you see what they see.

### Project

### What to learn

- Use the “text” tool in paint editor
- Stamping
- Global variable vs Local variable
- Test often and find bugs early
- flag variable (indicator, like a “toilet in use” sign)

### Blocks

- stamp
- 

### Lesson Plan

| Step | Details |
| --- | --- |
| Introduction | * In all the projects we have created so far, we always see the character on the stage and either use the mouse or the keyboard to control it. There is another kind of projects that use “First Person View” This means that you don’t see the character on the screen, instead you see what they see. Essentially, you yourself becomes the character.
* In today’s lesson, we are going to set up a fruit shop. We are the customers, and select what fruit we want to add to the trolley, and finally come to the counter to checkout. We will be combining a lot of the important concepts and blocks we learnt previously, including message broadcasting, variables, decision making and more. Also, we will be touching something that we have been avoiding all these time: what the hell does it really mean for a variable to be “For all sprites” or “For this sprite only”.
* So I can’t wait and let’s get starte |
| Backdrop | * Frist, upload image “supermarket” from the Resource folder as our backdrop. It has a checkout counter and four different kinds of fruit on sale: orange, apple, lemon and pear. 
* Now, a store typically has a name, for example, Walmart, Cosco, Aldi etc. We would like to give our store a name too. Because our store sells fruit only, I’m gonna just call it “Jing’s Fruitopia”. We have seen how to add different shapes to a costume or a backdrop before, now let’s learn how to add some text too! Select the supermarket backdrop. We are going to add the name of the store roughly here. In the toolbox, there is an icon with a big letter “T”, which stands for “text” and this what we are going to use to add text. Select the tool, move your mouse to where you want to add the text, click, and you will see a text box where you can type in anything you want. So I’m type in “Jing’s Fruitopia” here. Once you finish typing, just press enter and it’s done. If you are not happy with its position, select the “Selection” tool and then you can select the textbox and move it around. So I’m just gonna place it roughtly at the center here.
* So, I’m not happy with the purple text here. Changing its color is the same as changing the color of, say, a rectangle. Make sure the textbox is selected, that is when you see the blue rectangle around it, go in to the “Fill”, and ajust the color, saturation and brightness. So here I want some kind of grey, so let’s set color and staturation to both 0, and reduce the brightness to about 70. I think that looks good!
* So our backdrop is done! |
| Sprites  | * Next, let’s add some sprites. 
* First, we need a sprite for each kind of fruit. There is an image file for each in the “Resources” folder. We are going to add them one by one. Adjust their sizes and place them at the right display rack. For each fruit, when the green flag is clicked, move to their current positions. 
* Next, add a trolley by selecting the “trolley” image from the Resources folder. Adjust its size and place it where the counter is. When green flag clicked, go to its current position.
* Ok, we are all set now! |
| Orange (Click and move to trolley) | * Ok, as we have seen in the demo at the beginning of this lesson, when shopping at ”Jing's Fruitopia“, we click the fruit we want and it goes to the trolley. Because all the fruit behaves pretty much the same, so let’s make the Orange sprite work, and the other fruits should be more or less the same.  
* So when the orange is clicked it moves to the trolley. But how does it know that is has been clicked? Yes, this should not be new to you by now: we use the “when this sprite is clicked” hat block. When this message is received, we have different ways to move it to the trolley? Can you suggest a few? Yes, all these would work, and to be honest, it’s up to you which one you want to choose and what kind of effect you want to achieve. For me, I would like the orange to slowly glide to the trolley. I think I have already given away what my choice would be: Yes, glide. So I’m gonna use the “glide to” block, to make the orange glide to the trolley in one second. 
* Test. Click the orange, and it moves the trolley. Nice!
* Problem: Ok, now there is a problem: the orange sprite stays in the trolley and there is no more orange we can click on the rack in case we want to add more.
* Solution: One solution is to make the orange go back to where is was on the rack. Let’s try that, after the glide, go to it’s start position.
* Test. Ok, click, it goes the to trolley and BOOM! It’s back. And we can click it again and again to add as many oranges as we want.
* Problem: But we have a new problem now: the orange in the trolley is gone and it makes it look like that we have not choosen any orange! That’s not good….
* Solution: Ok, clearly a sprite any only exist in one place, it can be in the trolley and at the fruit rack at the same time. So how can we solve this problem? For that, we need to first introduce a new tool in the “Pen” extension. Let’s first add the “Pen” extension from the extension library. We have use this extension extensively in lesson “[Let’s Paint](8%20Let%E2%80%99s%20Paint!%20bdc3bc2a4a914ce985e89ca64c065fdd.md)”, where we explain how to draw lines using, for example, the “pen up” and “pen down” blocks. But what we have not touched on is this “stamp” block and it’s time now to reveal how it works. So, when you hear the word “stamp”, what comes to your mind? Has anyone seen this before? Yes, it’s called a “wooden stamp”, and people carve out a special pattern or some text on the flat surface here. When you press this stamp onto an ink pad and then onto a piece of paper, it leaves a copy of the  pattern or the text on the paper. This process is called “stamping” So the "stamp" block works similarly. When you use it, it takes the sprite’s current costume and creates a copy of that costume on the stage. So let’s try: move the orange sprite anywhere on the stage, then click the “stamp” block, now, you might not see any change now, but watch, once I move the orange away, there is a copy of its costume stamped on the stage. Now, if I click one more time, and move away the sprite again, it leaves a new stamp on the stage. This way, you can create as many oranges as you like. But here is the catch: even though these new orange stamps looks the same as the orange sprite, you cannot move them, change their size, or position like you can noramlly do with the sprite itself. In other words, once the stamp is created, it’s carve in stone and stay there forever. Also they are not affected by any future changes made to the original sprite. For example, if I change the size of the orange sprite, none of the stamps changes at all. But if I now start stamping again, you can see that the new stamps is bigger than those old ones because the sprite itself is bigger now. Ok, now, you might be wondering, what if I want to remove all the stamps?  So let me ask you a question first: how do you clean up whatever you have drawn with a pen? Yes, use the “erase all” block. Ok, the “stamp” block is from the pen extension, right? So how do you think we can clean up all the stamps then? Yes, use the “erase all” block again. Let’s try, click the “erase all” block and BOOM, all the orange stamps are gone! Nice! Ok, let’s put orange back to where it was on the rack. With all these new knowledge about stamping, can you come up with a solution now? Anyone want to try? Yes, as soon as the orange glides to the trolley, we stamp it, and then move back to the start position.
* Test. Click, it goes to the trolley, and back. But hey, we now have a stamp of the orange in the trolley! Hooray!
* To make sure we start with an empty trolley, let’s erase everything when the program starts. The question is where should we do that? Technically, you can add the “erase all” block to any of the fruit when the green flag is clicked. But which one? Some of you might say the Orange sprite and some might want to add it to the Apple sprite. Because we want to treat all the fruit sprites equal, adding it to one sprite and not the other is not perfect. But adding it too all sprites is also unnecessary, because a single “erase all” block would do the job. In this case, the Stage is actually a good place. We just need to add the block once in the Stage after the green flag is clicked.
* Test. |
| Orange (local price) | * Now, when shopping, we need to know some numbers: first is how much each product costs and second is what is the total price we have to pay for all products in our trolley. So let’s work on that next. 
* First, we need to store the price of orange somewhere so that we can use it later when calculating the total price. And as we have seen many time by now, everytime you want to store something, use a box, or in Scrath term, use a variable. So let’s create a variable, name it “price”. Now, before clickig the “OK” button, we have to address something that we have been avoiding on purpose up until this point, that is the two options here: “For all sprites” and “For this sprite only”. We need to understand their differences and this will be important for pretty much all your future projects whenever you create variables. So let’s get to the bottom of it once and for all.
* So what does it mean when a variable is “For all sprites” and what does it mean when it is “For this sprite only”? To explain that, let’s use the Gandi IDE as an example. In the very first lesson of this course when we first introduced the Gandi IDE, we mention that it provides a collaboration mode, meaning that more that one people can work on the same project. So if I add a sprite to the project, you, as a collaborator can see that change too. Therefore, the project is shared across all of us, and we usually call it “global”, meaning everybody can see and change it. On ther other hand, think about the assignment project you work on after each lesson, although you all start with the same file, but you work on your own copy, so any changes you made is only visible to you, every one has a different copy of the project. We call it “local” meaning only you can see and change it.
* Ok, back to the “price” variable, now we can explain what these two options are: “For all sprites” means this variable is “global” and shared; “For this sprite only” means this variable is “local” and visible only to this sprite. So do you think it should be “global” or “local”? Before we answer that question, let’s create a price “For all sprites”, just to make it clear, we call it “global price” and see what would happen. Make it visible on the stage so we can see how its value changes. Now, in the orange sprite, when set its value to 5, for example. And when this sprite is clicked, say out the global price. Ok, go the apple sprite, first to notice is that “global price” variable also appears in the apple’s variable list, meaning we can use it here too. So when flag is clicked let’s set it to “3”, for example. Now, watch, when we click the green flag, the value of “global price” becomes “3” instead of “5”. What? We clearly set it to 3 in the orange sprite, how come it becomes 5 now? But remember, we also set it to 5 in the apple sprite. Because it is global, it can be seen and changed by any sprite, so what happens is that orange first sets it to 3, then apple comes along and set it to 5. Now, watch what happen when I click the orange, pay attention to what it says: it says 3! We set it to 5 but then it says 3? Why? Well again, because “global price” is for all sprites, after apple sets it to 3, orange see this change and also think it is 3! As a result, both fruit’s prices are the same, 3. In real life, clearly different fruits has different prices, orange has a different price than apple. Let’s first delete all the blocks using “global price” variable. How can we give each fruit a different price? Yes, create a new variable “local price” and make it “For this sprite only”! Also make it visible on the stage by checking this box. Now, the first different you would notice is that, unlike “global price”, “local price” also has the name of the sprite before it. What does this mean? It means this variable belongs to the sprite Orange only and is not shared with any other sprites, this is what “local” means after all, right? Now go to the “Apple” sprite, and take a look at its varaible list. Do you see the “local price” variable this time? No! Because, again, “local price” is local to the orange sprite and here the apple sprite cannot see or use it. So how does the Apple sprite get its own price? Easy! Create another local price variable for it too! So let’s make another local variable “local price” for the Apple sprite. Make it visible on the stage, and what do you see? Yes, this time, the “local price” variable has sprite “Apple” at the beginning, meaning it belongs to the Apple sprite. So essentially, we now have two, instead of one, variables, one for each fruit. Now, if we repeat our experiment previously, setting the orange’s “local price” variable to 5 in the orange sprite and say it out when it’s clicked, and setting the apple’s “local price” variable to 3 in the apple sprite. If we run it again, we can clearly see here that the two variables are set to 5 and 3 respectively, and if I click the orange, it says 5 this time, which makes sense. 
* So to summarise, if you want all sprites in your project to shared and have one variable, meaning they call all see and change it, make it global by selecting the “For all sprites” option; on the other hand, if you want each sprite to have a privetly own variable, meaning no one else can see or change it, make it local by selection the “For this sprite only”. A good undertanding of this difference is very imporant in more complex projects. So you should get use to thinking about which option to select whenever you create a new variable from now on.
* Ok, now we have the the price for each fruit, it’s useful if we can display them somewhere on the rack so that you would know how much each one costs. Ok, we could move the two price variables just above the oranges and the apples. But right now, they are just too big and take up too much space. Fortunately, we have seen in lesson “[Paint it](8%20Let%E2%80%99s%20Paint!%20bdc3bc2a4a914ce985e89ca64c065fdd.md)” that you can change how a variable gets displayed on the stage. There, we change the “width” variable to a slider. If we right click on the variable, you can see there is another “large readout” format that you can use. Once you select that, the variable’s name is all gone, leaving only the value, which is 5 for the price of oranges. And we can do the same for the Apple’s price variable. Now, the we can move and fit them nicely. Cool! Of course, you can do the same for lemon and pear too and I’m leave that as an after-class exercise.
* Finally, we name those variables “local price” just to make it clear that they are “For this sprite only” so we can better see how they are different from global variables. But since we now know the differences, we can just name them “price”. To change the name of a variable, find it in the variable list, right click your mouse,  and choose “Rename or edit variable”, this brings up a window similar to the one when first create the variable. Here you can not only change its name but also make it “For all sprites” or “For this sprite only”. So here, let’s change its name from “local price” to “price”  |
| Orange (global total price) | * Ok, now each fruit has its own price, once we click a fruit and add it to the trolley, we need to work out what is the latest total price. And where should we store this total price? Yes! variable!
* So let’s create another variable and name it “total”. Ok, so here is the question: should this variable be “For all sprites” or “For this sprite only”? Any idea? Do you think we need a total price for each fruit or do we need a single total price for all the fruits? Yes, we just need a single total price, and every time a fruit is selected, we just need to increase the total by the its price.
* Ok, let’s first create a “total” variable, and make sure you select the “For all sprites” option. Ok, when the program starts, what initial value should we set “total” to? Yes, zero because no fruits have been added to the trolley yet. But here is a question, where should we set its initial value? For a local variable, we know which sprite it belongs to, so it makes sense to set the variable’s initial value in that sprite, for example, we set orange’s “price” variable to 5 in the orange’s code and apple’s “price” to 3 in the apple’s code. But since “total” is shared by all sprites, and does not belong to any single sprite, where should we set its initial value? So here is a general rule: since global variable does not belong to any sprite, we normally set its initial value in the Stage’s code. So let’s select the Stage, and go to its code, add the “set variable to” block to set “total” to zero after “erase all”. Note that, because “total” is global, it can be seen and used by both all the sprites and the stage. 
* Ok, so when should we change “total”? Yes, every time a fruit, such as orange is clicked and added to the trolley, “total” should be increased by the price of orange. So under block “when this sprite is clicked”, we change “total” by “price”, and we do the same for Apple.
* Test. As we click and add an orange to the trolley, “total” is increased by its price, which is 5; and when we add an apple, “total” is increased by its price, which is 3. And you can add orange and apple as many times as you want and “total” will be increased accordingly. With this, we now know how much we need to pay when checking out. |
| Checkout | * Ok, we have all the fruits in the trolley now, it’s time to checkout!
* First we need a checkout staff. Let’s add a sprite by selecting the “Checkout Staff” image from the Resources folder. Place it at the counter, and when flag is clicked, go to her current position.
* We start checking out by by clicking the checkout staff. So let’s add a “when this sprite is clicked” hat block. Then she is going to ask us if we want to pay or not. This is because, at this point, we might still change our mind and decide that we do not need the fruits anymore. So, how do you make a sprite ask any question in Scratch? Yes, we use the “ask and wait” block, so let’s add that after the the staff is clicked. For the question, we just say “Would you like to pay?” 
* Test. Ok, so we add one orange and one apple, and the click the staff, she now asks us “Would you like to pay?” and we are prompted by the textbox again where we can type in our answer. Let’s make the “answer” block visible again to see it more clearly. Right now, if I type in “Yes”, the value of the “answer” block becomes “Yes” and this should not be new to you after learning last lesson. But right now, nothing happens. On the other hand, if we click her again, and answer “No” this time, the value of the “answer” block becomes “No”, and still nothing happens. So let’s work on that next!
* If we answer “Yes”, then the checkout staff would let us how much to pay and thank us for shopping at Jing’s Fruitopia. Let’s add an “if then” block. How do we check if the answer is “Yes”? In the [last lesson](11%20Math%20Quiz%20e4c581248b9f46768c97a45f25b3bc4c.md), we used the “equal” operator to check if an answer equals to a number, and actually this operator can be used to compare two texts too. So let’s add an “equal” to the “if” block, and compare the value of “answer” with the word “Yes”. If we answer “Yes”, this condition becomes true, the staff would say “The total is 8”. We have also seen something similar in the last lesson where we report the student’s score at the end. Do you still remember how to join the text “Your final score is ” with the “scrore” variable? Yes, we used the “join” block! And do you think we can do the same  here? Of course! All you need to do is just to join the text “The total is ” with the variable “Total” and put the entire “join” block in a “say” block. That way, the staff tells us what is the total we need to pay. After that, she might then say “Thank you for shopping at Jing’s Fruitopia”.
* Test. Again add an orange and an apple. Click and answer “Yes”, now, the staff first says “The total is 8” and then “Thank you for shopping at Jing’s Fruitopia!” Perfect!
* Ok, so right now, nothing happens if we answer anthing other than “Yes”. Ideally, if our answer is not “Yes”, that means we have changed our mind and no longer want to buy the fruits. It’s ok, not a big ideal. But it would be nice if the staff can say something. So, we need to replace this “if then” block with an “if then else” block and the “else” branch is where we handle the case when customer did not answer “yes” and wish to cancel the checkout. So here the staff can just simply say “It’s ok. No prolem!”
* Test. OK, when we are asked whether we want to checkout or not, we say “No” and the staff replies “It’s ok. No prolem!” Actually, to cancel the checkout, we can type in anything here, even something that does not even make sense, like the jubbish here, and because it is not “Yes”, so it will be treated as a “No” and as a result, the checkout is cancelled. 
* Ok, it doesn’t matter whether the customer checks out or changes his/her mind and decides to cancel, we should set “total” back to zero and clean up the trolley. The first is easy, just use the “set total to” block to reset it. But how do we clean up the trolley? Remember, the fruits in the trolley are just stamps of the fruit sprites. How you clean up a stamp? Yes, you use the “erase all” block from the pen extension. So let’s add that after resetting “total”.
* Test. Now, after checkout, BOOM, “total” variable is back to zero and the trolley is empty again.  |
|  Bug fix: Checking out with no fruit  | * OK, before we move on, let’s check if there is any problems with our code so far. It’s always a good idea to test your code often so that you can find any bugs as early as possible when it is still not too difficult to fix. As your problem becomes bigger, it becomes harder to find bugs, and it becomes even harder to fix the bugs. So let’s have a 5 min break, play with what we have now and see if you can identify any issues. Off you go! Ok, times up! Anyone wants to share your findings?
* Ok, to see the first problem, try not to select any fruit, and then click the checkout staff. See what happens? She still ask whether we want to checkout or not. And if we answer “Yes”, then she would say “The total is 0” and “Thanks for shopping at Jing’s Fruitopia”. That’s does not look quite right. If there is nothing in your trolley, what are you checking out for? Right? So, we should only checkout if we have indeed selected any fruit or in other words, if there is at least one fruit in our trolley!
* So, before the staff tells us what the total us and thank us for shopping, she really needs to check if there is anything in the trolley at all! So, let’s use an “if then else” block. We move all these blocks to the if branch so that we only checkout if the customer has selected something. Ok, how do we check if there is something in the trolley? What condition should we put into the “if then else” block here? Any idea? Ok, when we have not selected any fruit, what do you think the value of the “total” variable is? Yes, zero. And when we have selected some fruit, what do you think the value of the “total” variable is? Well, it depends what fruit and how many of them we have selected, so we do not know the exact number. But what we do know for sure is that, “total” will be greater than zero? Right? It is no longer zero if at least one fruit is selected. Now, can you come up with an if condition to check if the trolly is empty of not? Yes, we use the “greater than” block to check if “total” is greater than zero. If this is true, then there fruit in the trolley and we can checkout; else, our staff can just say “Please choose some lovely fruit from our collection!”
* Test. If we click the staff without selecting any fruit, and answer “Yes” to her question, she then replies, “Please choose some lovely fruit from our collection!” because there is nothing for her to checkout! Cool! |
| Bug fix: Picking fruit while checking every sprite | * Ok, so we have fix one bug. Good. But unfortunately, there is one more and this one is even more hideous. Let’s say I pick an orange and start to checkout, now, watch, just after the staff says, “The total is 5”, I click the apple and then it goes to the trolley while we are checking out! This doesn’t look right: if you are already checking out, that means what you want to buy is determined and we do not want any new fruit to be added to the trolley. Hmmm…. another problem to solve!
* But before we examine the solution, let’s first think about something that you might have come across in real life: when you are on train or a plane, you often see that the toilet there has a little light to tell you whether someone else is currently using it. If it is on, you should probably wait outside; otherwise, it’s empty and feel free to walk in. This light is an indicator telling you something is currently going on and you should plan your action accordingly.
* Back to our supermarket. The staff should also turn on a “light” to indicate that she is currently checking out so that a customer cannot add anymore fruit to the trolley at the same time. And once the checkout is finished, the “light” can be turned off and fruits can be added again.
* In coding, we normally call such “light” a flag and use a variable for it: it can be either on or off, or in coding terms, true or false. We can either do or not do certain things depending on whether the flag is true or false. Enough talking, and let’s see how this is done in code.
* We first create a new variable and name it “Checking out?”, notice the question mark at the end: this is not necessary, I just add it to make it clearer that the variable is intended to be used as a flag. We will set it “For all sprites” for now and will later see if this is the right choice. Ok, when the program starts, the customer is not checking out, so we set its initial value to “false”. Ok, when do you think the checkout starts? Yes, when the staff is clicked and before she asks “Would you like to pay?” So we set “Checking out?” to “true” just before the “ask” block. Remember our toilet example? This is just like turning the light on after entering the toilet, and others need to check the light to decide whether they can enter or not. Now, we also need to remember to turn the light off when finishing using the toilet so that others can use it later. When do you think the checkout is finished? Yes, just after resetting “total” So let’s set it back to “false” when everything is done, just like turn the toilet’s light off.
* Next, who do you think cares about whether the customer is checking out or not? Remember what was the problem that we are trying the solve in the first place? Yes, the problem is that fruit can still be clicked and added to the trolley when the customer is checking out. To avoid this, each fruit, when clicked, needs to know whether the customer is checking out or not. So, each fruit, orange, apple, lemon and pear cares about whether the customer is checking out or not. So, in the orange sprite, just after the “when this sprite is clicked” block, we add an “if then” block and move the entire script inside. What is the condition we need to check here? Yes, we add the orange to the trolley if the customer is NOT checking out. How do we know he/she is NOT checking out? Yes, when the value of “checking out?” flag variable is equal to “false”. This is just like you looking at the light to see if it is on or off before deciding whether to enter the toilet or not. By the way, we can now answer why select “For all sprites” for the “checking out” variable: because not only the Checkout staff sprite needs it, each and every fruit sprite also needs to check it value to decide whether they can be move to the trolley or not. So clearly, this variable needs to be global.
* Test. Now when we are in the process of checking out, try to click any of the fruit, and this time, nothing happens. Perfect! |
| Next customer | * Ok, so the program is pretty much done by now. We can add fruit to trolley, we can keep track of the total cost and we can talk to the staff to checkout. Nice!
* But what will be even nicer is that when a customer finishes checking out, rolls the trolley to the left until it’s out of sight, and then back to get ready for the next customer. OK, let’s try to finish the project with this nice little animation.
* First, the trolley will only rolls when the previous customer has finished checking out. And when does that happen? Well, it happens here, when we are setting “Checking out?” to false, right? But this is in the Staff sprite, how the trolley sprite know that the checkout is done? Yes, whenever you want a sprite to tell another sprite that something has happened, always think about using broadcast! So let broadcast a message here, and I will just name it “Next customer”.
* Ok, so go to the “Trolley” sprite, when it receives the “Next customer” message, let’s move it to the left where it can on longer be seen by using the “glide” block and set x to -300. You might need to experiment with the x value so that the trolley cannot be seen at all. Then wait for one second and go back to its original position. 
* Test. Ok, finish checking out, the trolley moves to the left, and back. Cool! |
| Sound | * Add “Machine” sound  when successfully check out
* Add “Coin” sound when fruit is added |

### Further Exploration

- Finish the code for other fruits.
- Use a variable to display “Jing’s Fruitopia” instead and change the block saying “Thank you for shopping at Jing’s Fruitopia” by using this new variable. What is the benefit of using this variable in the say block? Because after all, the result is the same.
- There is another bug, if we click the fruit as soon as the trolley moves to the left, the fruit still moves towards the trolley even though it is not ready for the next customer yet! Fix that!
- Find a way to keep track of how many of each fruit we have selected and when checking out, apart from telling us the total, the staff should also let us know the number of each fruit. For example, if the customer selects 3 oranges and 2 apples, the staff would then say “You have selected 3 oranges and 2 apples. The total is 21”

### Local vs Global variable example

Sure, I can give you a fun and interesting example to explain the difference between local and global variables to kids who are just starting to learn programming using Scratch. Here's an example you can use:

Imagine you have a classroom full of students, and each student has their own pencil case. This pencil case is their local "variable" because it belongs to them and no one else can use the things inside it. Now, let's say there's a big box of crayons in the corner of the classroom that everyone can use. This box of crayons is the global "variable" because it's shared among all the students.

In Scratch, local variables are like the pencil cases. They are specific to a particular sprite or script, and their values can only be accessed and modified within that sprite or script. Global variables, on the other hand, are like the box of crayons. They can be accessed and modified by any sprite or script in your Scratch project.

Here's a practical example you can create in Scratch:

1. Create a sprite that represents a student (e.g., a cat or a character).
2. Create a local variable for this sprite called "myPencilCase" and set its initial value to 0.
3. Add a script that increases the value of "myPencilCase" by 1 every time the sprite is clicked.
4. Create another sprite that represents a teacher (e.g., a different character or a sprite from the library).
5. Create a global variable called "sharedCrayons" and set its initial value to 10.
6. Add a script to the teacher sprite that decreases the value of "sharedCrayons" by 1 every time the sprite is clicked.

Now, when you click on the student sprite, only the value of "myPencilCase" (the local variable) will increase, but the value of "sharedCrayons" (the global variable) will remain unchanged. However, when you click on the teacher sprite, the value of "sharedCrayons" will decrease, and this change will be visible to all sprites in the project.

By demonstrating this example, kids can visually understand that local variables are specific to individual sprites or scripts, while global variables are shared among all sprites and scripts in the project.