# 7 Knock, Knock!

[99 Best Knock Knock Jokes for Kids and Adults (today.com)](https://www.today.com/life/inspiration/knock-knock-jokes-rcna44380)

### What to learn

- Knock-knock jokes and pun.
- Keep asking questions to find better solutions.
- Program should be easy to change and does not introduce new error as a result of doing that
- Broadcast is like using a speaker to shout to every one

### Blocks

- broadcast
- when i receive

### Lesson Plan

| Step | Details |
| --- | --- |
| Background | * Ok, welcome back everyone. Welcome to a new lesson. First of all, I would like to congratulate everyone for completing the first level of the course. Hope you all had a good time so far and you are now falling in love with Scratch! We have learnt some of the most basic blocks of Scratch. Even with that, you can start building some pretty interesting projects! From today on, we are going to start the second leg of our journey! Building upon level one, we are going to see even more useful and interesting code blocks. They would allow us to build even more complex animations and games, unleashing your creativity to the next level! So without further ado, let’s get started!

* In this lesson, we are going to start thing fun and easy. Has anyone here heard of Knock-knock jokes before? Ok, Knock-knock jokes are a fun way to make people laugh. They're a type of riddle where you start by saying "Knock-knock." like somebody is knocking on the door, then the other person says, "Who's there?" Then, you give the first part of the joke, and the other person says, "___ who?" And then comes the punchline! Ok, if this isn’t clear enough, let me give you a few examples. 

* (Give a few Knock-knock jokes on the internet)

* Ok, some of the jokes are not really that funny. But it doesn’t really matter, you can replace it with any conversation between two persons to create any stories. The most important thing we should learn from this lesson is how two sprites can communicate with each other. This is something very important in Scratch. As you create more and more complex animations or games, you would quite often need to have sprites cooperate and work with each other, and being able to communicate between them is super important.

* Ok, we are going to build an animation with two sprites doing a knock-knock joke, here is what the final project looks like. We have two dinosaurs, one Sauropoda, that’s the green one, and one Triceratops, that’s the red one, meeting with each other. The Sauropoda first says “Knock-knock”, then the Triceratops asks “Who’s there?” The Saurapoda then replies “Yeah!”, and the Triceratops asks “Yeah who?” And finally the Saurapoda says “Yeah-hoo, I’m excited too!”. See the pun here? “Yeah Who” sounds very similar to “Yeah-hoo”! But of course, you can replace it with any knock knock jokes from the web page I showed you earlier. So as you can see, the two dinosaurs are taking turns to have a conversation with each other. To able to do that, we need something call Message Broadcasting in Scratch. So, let’s get right in! |
| Stage setup | * Ok, let’s create a new project in CCW. You know the drill. Open up a new project, change the name to “Lesson 7 - Knock, knock!”, change the stage size to 4 by 3, and finally delete the sprite. Ok, we now have clean sheet to start with!

* Right, let’s select a backdrop first. Earlier, you have seen that the joke was between two dinosaurs, so what better backdrop than a Jurassic park? Luckily, there is already a pretty nice Jurassic backdrop in Scratch. So find and add that to our project. The backdrop is already selected, so let’s click the “Backdrops” tab to go  to the backdrop editor. Then select choose a backdrop to go into the backdrop library. Here, just search for Jurassic and there is only one result, the “Jurassic” image. Click that to add to our backdrop list. Now just delete the default empty backdrop and click the code tab to go back to the main editor. So our stage has a new Jurassic backdrop. Pretty cool! |
| Add sprites | * Right, the stage is set, time for the sprites. We need to dinosaur sprites, and both of them can be found in the Scratch sprite library. Select “choose a sprite”, in the sprite library, search for “Dinosaur”. Now you can see five different dinosaurs. It’s up to you which one you would like to use. I would just select “Dinosaur1” and “Dinosaur2”. Now both are added to the stage. Let’s move dinosaur1 to the left and dinosaur2 to the right. 

* Ok, time to add some basic set up code for both. First of all, I think the two dinosaurs are a bit too big. So when the project starts, let’s first make both smaller. In the code area for Dinosaur1, add a “when flag clicked” block, then set size to 80%. Same with Dinosaur2, “when flag clicked”. set size to 80% .

* Test. Ok, click the Go button, and both dinosaurs are smaller. I think their size looks good now.

* Next, we want both dinosaurs to always start at their current positions. So let’s add a “go to” block for both. The “go to” block already has their current x and y coordinates, so we just need to add them below the “set size block”. 

* Test. Now, if we drag both dinosaurs to some random locations and start the project, they always go back to the same positions. Nice!

* Finally, Dinosaur2 is facing the wrong direction: it should faces Dinosaur1. Turning your back to somebody when having a conversation isn’t very polite, right? So, how can we make it face right? Yeah, we can add a “Point in direction” block and what is the degree going to be? Yes, -90 is facing right. Cool.

* Test. Let’s test it again, ah, it’s upside down! But this is simple problem to fix right? Yes, we just need to add a “set rotation style left-right” block before the “point in direction block”. Test it again, and there you go, it’s feet are back onto the ground. Perfect! |
| Dinosaur1 says “Knock-Knock!” (wait) | * Ok, let’s make Dinosaur1 to kick things off! It would start with the line ”Knock Knock”! That’s simple enough, we just need to add a “say” block and change the text to “Knock, Knock!”

* Test. Let’s test this. Click the Go button, Dinosaur1 says “Knock, knock!” for 2 seconds. Work nicely! |
| Dinosaur2 says “Who’s there?” (wait) | * Ok, now it’s time for Dinosaur2 to ask “Who’s there?”. Well, this is also pretty simple, like dinosaur1, we just need to add another “say” block for it, right? Then change the text to “Who’s there?” 

* Test. Let’s test this again! 

* Problem: Ok, dinosaur2 did ask “Who’s there?” But there is clearly a problem. Can anyone spot that? Yes, both dinosaurs are saying their lines at the same time as soon as we click the Go button! But this is not how the joke is supposed to work, right? Dinosaur1 should kick things off by saying “Knock, knock” for 2 seconds, then Dinosaur2 should only ask its question after that, or 2 seconds later, right? It’s just like any normal conversation you would have, each of you take turn to say whatever you want to say. Of course, this is assuming that both of you are polite and not trying to speak over the other person. 

* Solution. Ok, so the problem is that Dinosaur 2 starts speaking too soon. It should wait until Dinosaur1 has finished its line. Aha, it should wait before it speaks. Hmmm… I think I know what to do. Do you? Yes, we need to use the wait block! When does Dinosaur need to wait? Yes, just before it says “Who’s there?”. So let’s put the block there. Next question is how long should it wait for? Well, as I said, it should only start speaking when Dinosaur1 has finished. How long does it take Dinosaur1 to finish its line? Yes, 2 seconds, right? So how long do you think dino2 should wait before it opens its mouth? Yes, 2 seconds! So let’s put 2 in its wait block. Ok, time to test it again!

* Test. Now dino1 says “Knock, knock” for 2 seconds, notice that dino2 is not saying anything at this now. Once dino1 finished, then dino2 asked “Who’s there?”. This is what a normal and civilized conversation is supposed to look like! Cool! |
| Dinosaur1 says “Yeah!” (wait) | * Right, let’s carry on with the conversation. Its dino1’s turn now. After hearing dino2’s question “who’s there?”, it’s going to replied with “Yeah!”. So let’s add another say block to the end, enter “Yeah!” in the first slot and leave it at 2 seconds. Ok, let’s give this a test!

* Problem. Aha, now, it’s dino1 who tried to speak over the other side: it says “Yeah1” before dino2 has finished asking “Who’s there?”. 

* Solution: So what should we do? Any idea? Yes, this time we need to add a wait block for dino1 after it says “Knock, knock” and before it says “Yeah!”. This leaves time for dino2 to finish its line. So how long do we need to wait for? Yeah, it took dino2 2 seconds to finish asking “Who’s there?” So here we again wait for 2 seconds.

* Test. Ok, let’s give this a test. “Knock, knock”, then “Who’s there?” and finally “Yeah!”. Perfect! |
| Complete the conversation  | * OK, now we have finished the first three sentence of this joke, hope you have a pretty good idea of how to make the two dinos speak in turns. Ok, I’m gonna step back and let you take the lead. Let’s take a 5min break, and see if you can finish the rest of the joke yourself. Please keep in mind that both dinos need to be polite and no one should speak over the other. Off you go!

* OK, time’s up! Has everybody nailed it? Anyone want to share how your solution? Come on! OK, very good. I hope everyone has come up with something similar. But even if you didn’t, no problem. The most important is trying. Even if you didn’t get it right the first time, as long as you keep trying, you would eventually figure this out! Right, let me just quickly finish mine, you can take a look just in case you didn’t quite get it work. 

* After dino2 says “who’s there”, it then needs to wait for 2 seconds again for dino1 to finish saying “Yeah!”. And then it asks “Yeah who?” for 2 seconds. Now, back to dino1, after it says “Yeah!”, it again needs to wait for 2 seconds for dino2 to finish asking “Yeah, who?”, and then finally, it says “Yeah-hoo! I’m excited too!”. And this complete the entire joke! 

* Test. Time to give this a final test! Works perfectly! Nice! |
| Problem with wait and say approach | * Wow, this is a pretty easy lesson! We have not even half way yet and the knock knock joke is done! So I guess we can call it a day and say goodbye now? What do you think? Aha, somebody has just pointed out that we have not learnt anything new yet! Well, yeah, we do learn what a knock knock joke is, but we have not learnt any new Scratch blocks! And we are supposed to get to know some new code blocks each lesson right? Also, at the beginning, I promised you that we are going to learn something super useful called Message Broadcasting! So where on earth is that? Yeah, you are absolutely right, we are far from done yet! 

* Ok, like a lot of cases we have seen before, there could be more than one solution for the same problem. Some of those solutions are better than others. And as pro coders, we should always try our very best to find those good solutions. But before we try to find good solutions, we need to be able to understand why the current solution we have is not good enough. Let’s do that first!

* Right now, we did come up with a solution to create a knock knock joke in Scratch. But is it good enough? Are there any potential problems? What do you think? Feel free to just say whatever you think. You can even say that what we have here is the best solution, just give reasons to back it up. Come on! Ok, very good, it seems that everybody has some thoughts on this. Awesome! Ok, let’s now figure this out together!

* Sometimes, a good way to question you solution is asking “what if?” What if something changes, would your code still work? If not, would it be difficult to get it work again? 

* Question: Ok, the first “what if” question I’m going to ask is: what if I make Dino1 say “Yeah!” for 4 seconds instead of 2 seconds? Would the joke still work? Anyone? Yes, my gut feeling is that it probably won’t work anymore! Before we try to figure out why, let’s just run it and check of our gut feeling is correct or not.

* Test. Aha, see? Dino2 start to ask “Yeah who?” before Dino1’s has finished saying “Yeah!”. It is trying to speak over Dino1 again! Not good! 

* Ok, so there is a problem. What needs to be changed to make it work again then? Yes, someone just say you can make Dino2 waits twice as long! Good answer! But can you find where in the script does it need to wait longer? We have two wait blocks and two say blocks, all of them are waiting for 2 seconds now. So which one should we change to 4 seconds? Ok, take your time and try to figure this out! Aha, I can see that some of you are struggling a little bit. We kind of know that one of those wait blocks should probably be changed. But exactly which one? To answer that, we need to carefully go through the entire joke again slowly in our head to know that the Dino2’s question “Yeah who?” needs to come after Dino1’s sentence “Yeah!”. So we need to change the time for the wait block just before this “yeah who?” block to get the order right again. 

* Test. Let’s test this change. Yeah, it works again. Only that it now takes longer for Dino1 to say “Yeah!”. Ok, not bad.

* Ok, you might say that’s not bad. We made a change, found out something doesn’t work, and find a solution for it. So what is the catch? Well, you are absolutely right, it doesn’t seem that terrible. But you also need to remember that we are having a very very short joke or conversation here. What, there are only 5 sentences in total. But what if we have a conversation that is much much longer, people can have very long conversation, it’s not that uncommon at all! For example, they are 100 back and forth between two sprites, meaning each one has 100 wait blocks and 100 say block. And what if I now choose one of those say blocks and make its time twice as long. Do you still think you can quickly find out which wait block in the other sprite needs to be changed? I don’t think so, well, at least I can’t. This is because the script is going to be very long, and as we all know, long script is bad, one of the reasons it’s bad is because it’s hard to find and change anything in a very long script!

* Now get prepare for something that might blow your mind: A more serious problem with our wait and say solution is that, it is not really a conversation between two sprites at all! What? Yes, you hear me right, it might look at two sprite are chatting with each other back and forth, but it is not really a conversation at all! Booomm, my mind is just gone! Ok, let me explain. If you assume that you are one of the dinosaurs, let’s say dino1, you would then suddenly realize that you are not talking to any one at all! Why? What do I mean by this? Well, take a look at the script of dino1. Once the program starts, it says “Knock, knock.” Ok, nothing wrong with that. But if this were a real conversation, what would you do? Yeah, you would then wait until you hear what the other side says before continue again, right? What does dino1 do instead? Well, it does wait, but doesn’t wait until getting the message from the other side, it just waits for 2 seconds before continuing with the rest of the joke. In other words, it says it own thing without even caring what the other side says. To make it clean, let’s go to dino2, disconnect the “when flag clicked” block with the rest, so when the GO button is clicked, dino2 is not going to do anything. 

* Test. Now, start the program. Aha, do you see that? Even though dino2 is not saying anything now, dino1 is still saying “Knock, knock!”, “Yeah！” and finally “Yeah-hoo! I’m excited too!” It does not care what the other side says or even if the other size exists at all, it just do its own thing!  I would certainly not call this a “conversation”, would you? This is just self-talking. In a real conversation, you say something, the other side hears what you said and responds to it, then you hear what they said, and respond again, going back and forth.   |
| Broadcast and receive message | * So really, a conversation is all about exchanging messages between two sides. Just think about any conversation you’ve ever had with anyone, your parents, friends or teachers. Whatever you say, that becomes a message that gets sent to the other person. Once hearing that message, the other person then replies with his/her message back to you. And once you received and heard their message, you replies again. This goes back and forth between the two of you. In our example here, when dino1 says “Knock knock!”, it is sending that message to the dino2. Once dino 2 receives this message, it responds with “Who’s there?” And that becomes another message that gets sent back to dino1. The rest of the joke is just sending messages between the two. 

* Solution: Ok, so it looks like we need a way for sprites to send messages between each other. But before that, let’s first talk about one important distinction. So far, we have been focusing on conversation between two sides. So each message sent out is going to be received by only one person and no one else. This is a one-to-one direct communication. This is like two persons having a private conversation in a room. But there is a different kind of communication. Let’s say in a classroom where a teacher is giving a lesson to 10 students. Each instruction the teacher gives is going to be some kind of message, right? But the difference is that this message is not sent to just one student, instead, it is sent to and received by all students in the classroom. This is what often called broadcasting, meaning the message is delivered to more than one person. Unlike a private conversation, this is like using a megaphone to shout out to everyone!

* In Scratch, messages sent between sprites are always broadcasted, meaning you cannot really send messages privately between only two sprites. Instead, each message sent is going to be received by all sprites in the project, including the one who is sending it. So if Dino1 send a message “Knock, knock!”, this is going to be heard and received by both dino1 and dino2 in the project. Of course, there are only two dinos in our project, so it does not make too much difference what kind of communication it is. But later in the course, we will see how having all sprites receive the same broadcasted message can be useful.

* All right, having said all that, it’s time to see how to actually broadcast messages in Scratch. Like always, everything should be done with code blocks. Every time we need to find a new code block, the first thing we need to do is to find out which category does it belong to. So here’s the question for you: where do you think you can find a block that broadcasts messages? Is it some kind of motion? Does it have to do with what a sprite looks? Or maybe something else? Ok, broadcasting something is actually an Event because something has just happened! So you know where to look? Yes, the Events category! If you go there and look at the bottom, you would see two blocks that start the word “broadcast”, one called “broadcast message1” and the other called “broadcast message1 and wait”. Aha, they look like what we need! In this lesson, we will be using the “broadcast message1” block. Later in the course, we will be learning how to use the other one. So, let’s first drag out “broadcast message1” and take a closer look.

* This block has a drop down menu and the current default option is “message1”. Running this block is like having some sprite use a megaphone and shout out “message1” to everybody! Ok, “message1” has no meaning whatsoever, because you are not supposed to ever use it! For our joke here, we want Dino1 to shout out “Knock, knock!” first. So how can we broadcast that message? Well, you know what to do with a dropdown menu right? Yes, you click to open it and check what else is there! Let’s do that! OK, there are only two options, the default message “message1” and one called “New message”. Right, this “New message” option is the secret to get a sprite broadcast any message you want! If we click it, a small window pops up. There is a big textbox in the center where you can type in any message you want to broadcast! So for the first line of the joke, we want dino1 to broadcast message “Knock, knock!”. Let’s type that in! Once you are done, just click this Ok button, now the window is gone and see what happened? Yes, the message of this broadcast block has change to “Knock, knock!”! Now, every time this block is run, the “Knock, knock!” message is going to be broadcasted! Cool! If you click the dropdown menu again, you can this new message option. Of course, you can still choose “message1” for whatever reason. Or if you want to add another message, simply click “New message” again. 

* Test. Ok, let’ click this block to run it. Right, we can see that it is briefly lit up, meaning it has run. But nothing seems to happen. We don’t see any message flying around on the stage. So has the message really been broadcasted? If so, how do we actually know? Ok, remember, for any message communication, whether it’s one-to-one or broadcasting, there are two sides, right? The sending side and the receiving side? When your mum asks you to stop playing games and come for dinner, your mum is the sending side, and you are the receiving side. Of course, you could choose to actually listen to your mum or completely ignore her. Although I would not suggest you do that! The reason it seems that nothing has happened when we broadcasted the “Knock, knock” message is because nobody has chosen to listen to that message, they all ignored it! Here is something you need to understand, just because somebody broadcasts a message does not mean everybody else must listen to it, some might choose to, while others can also be free to ignore it completely. So can you guess what has just happened when we click the broadcast message? Yes, the message was indeed broadcasted by dino1, but the sad thing is nobody, including dino1 itself, has chosen to listen to the message! So it just went into thin air forever!

* Aha, to get the joke going, we do need dino2 to listen to that message so it can reply back! Let’s go to dino2’s code. Right now, there is nothing here that says “I’m going to receive and listen to a knock, knock message!”. Since the other side of message broadcasting is message receiving, we need another block for that. Well, can you guess where such block would be? Yes, if the broadcasting block is in the Events category, then a receiving block is most like there too! Let’s see if this is the case! AHa, have you found it? Yes, these is a block called “When I receive”, let’s drag it out! The first thing you would notice is that it is a hat block. What does that mean? Yes, it means this is going to be the first block that kicks start a new script! Previously, we have seen blocks such as “When key press” or “When sprite clicked”, they all start a new script when a certain key is pressed or when a sprite is [clicked.](http://clicked.So) So what kind of event do you think is going to cause the “when I receive” block to run? Yes, when a message is received! What message? Well this is where the dropdown menu comes in. Right now, it says “Knock, knock!” and this actually the message we want dino2 to receive. If you click open the menu, you can see that, besides that “Knock, knock!” message, there is also an option called “New message”. We have seen this in the “broadcast” block, and it works the same here, you can click it and create a new message. But here, we don’t want to do that, we just want to receive the “Knock, knock” message. So let’s cancel it. Now, once you add this “when I receive” hat block and choose “knock knock” message for a sprite, you are essentially saying that  I’m ready to receive the knock knock message without ignoring it!”. Cool, we finally have someone kind enough to listen to us. 

* Test. So let’s go back to Dino1 and run the broadcast block again. Ok, nothing seems to have changed. Still no action on the stage! What is still missing? Aha, yes, for dino2, we only say “I’m going to receive a knock knock!” message, but what we haven’t said is what dino2 is going to do when this message is received! Remember, the “when I receive” block is a hat block that starts a script to do something. 

* Right, so what we want dino2 to do when it receives “knock, knock”? Yes, we want it to reply with question ”who’s there”? So let’s add a say block and change the sentence to “who’s there”. 

* Test. Let’s go back to dino1 and broadcast the message again. Wow, did you see that? As soon as we broadcast the message, dino2 asks ”Who’s there?” So it received the message and responded to the message! That’s awesome! Our two dinos are now truly talking to each other! Perfect! 

* Right, what next? Well, to continue with the joke, simply having dino2 says “who’s there?” is not enough. It also needs to send that message back to dino1. So what should we do? Yes, we just need dino2 to broadcast that message! When should we broadcast that message? Yes, we should do that after dino2 receives the “Knock, knock!” message and replies “who’s there?” This means the broadcast block should come at the end of this script. Now, it says broadcast “Knock, knock!” and this is clearly not correct. So click and open the dropdown menu, select “New message”, and this time we are going to broadcast “Who’s there”. Let’s type that into the text box and click Ok. Right, so now dino2 broadcast message “Who’s there?” Once again, this is going to be sent to everyone, including dino2 itself. But who is the one that we really want to hear and respond to the message? Yes, dino1. So let’s go back to dino1. But right now, it is getting ready to receive that message? No! So what do we need to do? Yes, we need the “When I receive” hat block again. Since we are expecting message “Who’s there?” Let’s pick that from the dropdown menu. Ok, what should dino1 do when it receives this message? Yes, it should say “Yeah!”. So let’s add a say block after this hat block. And just like dino2, simply saying “Yeah!” is not enough. We also need to broadcast it so that dino2 can pick it up! This means yet another broadcast block at the end of this script. And this time, let’s create a new message “Yeah!”.

* Test. Ok, we have added quite a bit of code. So let’s test it to see where we are. Again, click and run the “broadcast Knock, knock!” block to kick things off. So dino2 receives this message and asks “Who’s there?” Then it also broadcast this question, which is then picked up by dino1, who then says “Yeah!”. Ok, so far so good. The joke is still the same joke as before, but now, as you can see from the code with the broadcast and receive blocks, we are having a true communication between two sprites now. Very cool! 

* So we just need to continue on in a similar fashion to finish the rest of the joke. Now since this is just going to repeat pretty much the same thing, I would want you to finish on your own. So let’s have a 5 min break and see if you can do it yourself! Off you go. Ok, times up, everybody finish it? Right, let me finish mine and see if your answer is more or less the same as mine. So after dino1 broadcasts “Yeah!”, time for dino2 to receive and respond to it. So go back to dino2, add another “when I receive” hat block, change the received message to “Yeah!”. Then asks question “Yeah who?”. Finally create a new message “Yeah who?” and broadcast it. Now, we are arriving at the end of the joke. Dino1 needs to receive this “Yeah who?” message and finally says “Yeah-hoo! I’m excited too!” Ok, do you think dino1 still needs to broadcast this message? Yes, probably not. Because this is the end of the joke, we are not expecting any further reply from dino2, so it doesn’t really matter whether we broadcast it or not. We can just leave it like this.

* Test. OK, let’s give this one more test. Click the “broadcast Knock, knock” block to start things off. Aha, see, now the two are having a back-and-forth between them. Pretty cool!

* But something is still not quite right. Firstly, the first line of dino1 “Knock, knock!” is missing. Secondly, we are the one who start the joke by clicking this “broadcast knock knock” block. But as we already know, it’s always better to start a program when we click the Go button. Let’s fix both. The first problem is simple, all we need to do is just add a say block before the “broadcast knock, knock” block and type in “Knock, knock!”.

* Test. Now, if we click this small script, the joke starts with dino1 saying “Knock, knock!” and we have the full joke. Awesome! 

* How about the second problem, how do we get the joke started by block the Go button? Yes, pretty simple, we are just missing a “when flag click” block for this script to start thing off. So let’s add that! Now, something interesting happens: we are having two scripts, both start with the “when flag clicked” block! But remember, this one was the original script where we use the say and wait approach. Since we are now having a much better solution based on message broadcasting, do you think we still need this script any more? No, right? So we can just delete it! But before you go ahead and throw it into the bin, there is some code blocks that from this script that we still need. What are they? Yes, the set size and go to block, we still need both to make sure dino1 start at the right position with the right size. So all we need to do is just move them into this new script under the “when flag clicked” hat block. Now, when the Go button is clicked, we still set dino1 to its correct size, move it to the right position and say “knock knock” kick things off. But the difference now is that, instead of waiting for dino2, dino1 broadcasts the “knock, knock” message to dino2. Ok, that’s dino1 pretty much done. Let’s turn our attention to dino2. Previously, we have this way and wait script for dino2 when the Go button is clicked. Do you think we still need it? Well, again, we still need part of it. What do we need to keep? Yes, we still  want to set the size, move to the right position, set rotation style and point it to the left. How about the rest? Do we still need them? No, because dino2 is also using message broadcast to communicate with dino1. So we can get rid of the rest of this script. Ok, I think dino2 is also done. 

* Test. Let’s give this code a final test! Aha, yeah, the joke is still the same as before, but we do not need to have either dinosaur wait for the other one! And do you still remember what the problem was when we use all those wait blocks? Yes, every time we change the number of seconds of any say block of one dino, we have to painfully find the corresponding wait block in the other dino and change its number of seconds to match things up. This is going to be a difficult task if this were not a simple joke, but a very long conversation. Now, with message broadcasting, do we still have the same problem? Well, no, because we don’t even have any wait blocks any more! You can now just change the number of seconds in any of the say block, and nothing else needs to be changed. Everything still works perfectly? So you don’t trust me? Let’s just change the time in the say “Yeah!” block to 4 seconds.

* Test. Now let’s test this. Aha, see? Even though “Yeah!” was said for twice as long, dino2 did not jump in and start its line “Yeah who?” before dino1 finished. Instead, it waist politely until dino1 has finished before it says “Yeah who?”. This is all because, dino2 is now only going to start saying “Yeah, who?” when it receives the “Yeah!” message from dino1. And dino1 is only going to send that message when it has finished saying “Yeah!”. So of course, there is no chance for dino2 to speak over dino1. And in fact, it doesn’t matter how long you change any say block to, the next line after that say block will only come only when it has finished. This all happens without you changing any code! How cool is that! |

### Exercises

- As we know, a sprite can receive its own broadcasted message. What would happen if a sprite  broadcasts its own message again after receiving it?
- How is the “broadcast and wait” block different from the “broadcast” block. Can you make use of it in the “Knock, knock” joke? If so, how is that different from just using “broadcast”? Is this better or worse?
- Can you find more real world examples of one-to-one communication and message broadcasting?
- Create a longer conversation (could be a different joke or even a whole story) between more than two sprites. Use the Say-and-Wait approach first, then use message broadcasting. Compare the two approaches and truly appreciate why message broadcasting makes your life easier.