# 0 Welcome and Setup

### References

[Completely uninstall VSCode (Visual Studio Code) on Windows - Code with Susan](https://codewithsusan.com/notes/completely-uninstall-vscode-on-windows)

### Key Points

- Intro to programming and Python
- Online IDE Replit
- Offline IDE Visual Studio Code

| Steps  | Notes |
| --- | --- |
| Opening words | * Ok everyone, welcome! For those of you who have not met me before, my name is Jing, the founder of Coderland. And I will be your teacher, your guide and your friend in this wonderful coding journey we are about to start! This course is all about Python, one of the most popular programming languages in the world. We will be learning the basics as well as creating a series of fun and exciting projects together! There will be drawings, apps, and games, and I can’t wait to show you how fun it is to play with Python. So let’s dive right in!  |
| Introduction to coding Python | * Ok, first thing first, what is “coding” or “programming” after all? You probably hear people talking about “coding” all the time, and it might seen a bit mysterious or even daunting! But it is not! Look at the world around you, there are computers all over the place: the laptop sitting on your desk, the smartphone in your hand, and if you have the money, maybe even an Apple Vision Pro on your head. All these devices look very different, but they are essentially all computers. Computers are useful, they can help us browser the internet, order food, learning online etc etc. But computers are really dumb, they are just a bunch of chips and wires under the hood. If they are so dumb, how can they do such amazing things for us?
* Well, they are dumb, but we humans are smart, right? So we can tell the computers what to do. And the reason we ask computers to do it instead of ourselves is because, and here’s the biggest advantage of computers, once they know what to do, they can do it really fast, I mean, really fast, blazingly faster, faster than any human can ever possibly imagine. So we combining the best of both worlds: the creativity and logical thinking of human and the super power of computers.
* When you ask someone to do something, you need to speak a certain language, right? For example, if I want you to get me some water, in English, I would say “Please give me a bottle of water!” In Chinese, I would say “请给我一瓶水”. Same with computer, if want it to do something for us, we need to speak to it in a certain language as well. And the language we speak to a computer is called “Coding Language” or “Programming Language” and the act of speaking that language is called “Coding” or “Programming”. This is how we communicate to a computer so that it can understand what we want. That’s it, that’s what coding is all about! 
* Ok, when you learn a language, you start with words, and then use words to compose sentences, and then use sentences to write articles etc etc. It gets bigger and bigger. Same with programming languages, we first learn the basic bits and pieces, for those of you who come from a Scratch background, you must be familiar with all the different blocks. Then we use these blocks to create large scripts. More formally, we call such scripts “programs” because they are created from a programming language.
* Now, we all know that there are a lot of different languages, like Chinese, English, French, Spanish etc. In fact, according to Wikipedia, there are more than 7000 languages in the world today. That’s insane! In the world of computer, there are also a lot of programming languages. Scratch is one of them, it’s designed specifically for young kids to talk to a computer, and because of that, it’s very visual, easy to use, as fun as playing LEGO bricks. Ok, but there are more programming languages out there, and Python, the one we are going to learn a lot in this course, is definitely one of the most popular choices.  It was created by Guido van Rossum in the 1990s, and because of its simplicity, powerful tools and great support, it soon took over the world and used everywhere to create all kinds of fun and useful programs.
* While Scratch is very visual and use colorful code blocks to write a program, Python is a what we called a “text-based” programming language. Meaning you write code using words, numbers and symbols, all typed in from the computer’s keyboard. This is big shift from the block-based Scratch and a big step towards becoming a more serious coder! But, please don’t let that put you off. If you have learnt Scratch before, you will find that a lot of concepts in Python are exactly the same despite looking very different. It’s like even though English and Chinese look very different, but as long as you understand the basic words and grammars of both languages, you can express the same idea in either one, like “get me a bottle of water”. For does of you who have not learnt Scratch before, no need to worry either. Because I would not assume any previous coding experience, and we will start from the very basics and build from there!
* So this is all out of the way, and let’s get out hands dirty and start play with Python now!   |
| Two different ways to write Python programs | * OK, to start writing Python programs, we first need an editor to write and run our code. If you have learnt Scratch before, you know that there are two ways to use such an editor: the first one is to to download and install an offline code editor. There are a couple of choices here, the most popular ones are the official Scratch Editor and Turbowarp. The second way is to use an online editor in a browser. The most popular ones are again the Scratch official one and Gandi.
* There are pros and cos to both approaches,  with an online editor, you can access your code anywhere at anytime as long as there is an internet connection. It’s is also easier to share and collaborate with other people online. The downside is that, whenever the connection becomes unstable, your coding experience can be very unpleasant. On the other hand, the biggest advantage of an offline editor is that it’s not going to be affected by the internet connection. In fact, you can write code without internet at all, and therefore the name “offline editor”. 
* In this course, we will be using both approaches online and offline. To be more specific, we will be using an online editor called ‘replit’ for the first half of course when we will not be dealing too much with animations and graphics. In the second half of the course, we will switch to an offline editor called ‘Visual Studio Code’ when we will be writing programs with a lot of graphics and animations.
* The reason we switch to an offline editor in the second half is because I find replit can be very slow and unresponsive at times when programs have graphics and animations. It can be very frustrated using it in that case.
* So in the rest of this lesson, I’m going to walk you through both replit and Visual Studio Code and get both setup and running. The process can be a bit tedious and boring. But trust me, you only need to do it once for the entire course and just be done with it.  |
| Replit | * Ok, first, let’s look at the online editor ‘replit’. Just type in ‘replit.com’ into your browser and hit return. You should be then landed onto the home page of replit. 
* If this is your first time using replit, and I would assume so, you need to signup first. Go to the upper left corner of the page and click ‘Log in’. Now, to signup, go to the bottom of the login page and click ‘Sign up’. Then you can use one of the supported ways to sign up. Here, I would suggest you using an email address to sign up with. Choose your password carefully. And then click ‘Create Account’. This should now create a new account with your email address and password. Here, I’ve already have an account, so I will not create another. Instead, I will now try to log in. This is also what you should do once your account has been created. 
* So, go the previous ’login’ page, type in your email address and password and then click ‘login’. If everything goes well, assuming that you have not mistype either your email address or password, you should be seeing this ‘Home’ page.
* There are a lot of buttons on this page, but don’t worry, we will only be using a few of them. The most important on is this big blue ‘Create Repl’ button. Now before we look at what it does, I need to first explain what ‘Repl’ really means. In this context, ‘Repl’ simple means a python project: if you want to create a calculator application, you create a repl; if you want to write a space invaders game, you create a repl. Think of it as a Scratch project, just like a scratch project can have code, costumes and sounds, a repl also can contain python code, image files and sound files. They together make up an application or a game. 
* Now when you click this button, a popup window shows up. It lets you set a few things about this repl. First is the template, when you click it, it gives you a bunch of options for may different programming languages. Because this is a Python course, we will type in ‘Python’ in the search box and this filters out all the Python related templates. This is one call ‘Pygame’, which is used to create proper games in Python. We will not be learning this in this basic Python course, if you are interested in using Python to create complex games, you are welcome to join my ‘Python for Games’ advanced course. In this course, we will be mainly using the plain vanilla ‘Python’ template. Select that. Next, go to the ‘Title’ text box and type in the repl’s name. You can give it any name you want. Because this lesson lesson shows you how to use replit, I will just call it ‘ReplitDemo’. And once that’s done, click ‘Create Repl’. 
* Ok, after a few seconds, we now enter the main editor window. Again, there are a lot of things going on here, but don’t worry, again, we only need to know a few things. On the left, we have a section called ‘File’, it contains all the files of a Python project. As I said before, a project can contain code, image, and sounds, all of them go under ‘File’. When the repl is first created, it comes with a default file called ‘main.py’. Now, the name of any file comes with two parts, the name, which is everything before the dot and the extension which is everything after the dot. The extension tells you what type of file it is. In this case, the extension is ‘py’ and this means this is a file that contains python code. We normally don’t change the extension, but sometimes we would like to change the name part. This can be done by right clicking on the file, and choose ‘Rename’, now the name ‘main’ is highlighted and we can change it to anything we like. For example, I can name it to ‘demo.py’ but doing so can cause problem. I will leave the exact program and finding its solution as a exercise for you to explore after the lesson. When you have a lot of files in your project, you can expand or collapse them all by clicking this little arrow here. 
* Next, when a file is selected, its content is shown in this large middle section here. This is like the code area in the Scratch editor. The difference here is, instead of putting colorful code blocks, we type in python code here. Remember, Python is a text-based programming language. 
* Ok, let’s write our very first Python program together! For now, just type with me and I will explain it later. Click the code area and you will now see a cursor flashing. Let’s type ‘print’, open and closed brackets, and then inside the brackets, type in a pair of single quotes, and inside the quotes, type in ‘Hello, world!’ Ok, everyone finish? Cool! We now have our very first Python program! Hooray! Ok, I know you might be scratching your head now thinking, what is this? What does the ‘print’ do? Why are we having this strange pair of quotes? And maybe more questions. Let me explain. First, a bit of history: traditionally when people pick up a new programming language, the very first program they often write is called the “Hello, world!” program. This basically just tells the computer to print a message “Hello, World!” to the screen. It’s just a way to show that everything is setup and working nicely. In python, to show a message on the screen, we use the  “print” function. To tell the function what to print, we give it a string, which is this text in a pair of single quotes. Ok, I know, you are now even more confused: what is a function? And what is a string? Let me explain.

* Let’s first think about what it means to print something in our everyday life. Well, most likely you would use a printer to print either some text or an image onto a piece of paper, right? Now, think about this “print” function as a printer, it prints things to the computer screen instead of a piece of paper. So what are these things to print? Well, in python term, it’s called a string. Although the name might sound a bit strange, it is actually very simple, a string is just whatever text you put into a pair of double quotes. The name actually comes from the fact that a text is just a string of multiple letters, hope this helps you to better remember it. Ok, we have a printer and a string to print, how do we give the string to the printer. This is where you need that pair of brackets. This is essentially saying: “Hey, printer, print whatever text that I give to you in this pair of brackets”. This way, the printer gets the string and does what it is suppose to do, that is print the string on the screen. We will be seeing the print function printing different strings again and again throughout this course, and it will become second nature to you I promise. So don’t get too hang up if you still cannot get your head around. 

* Ok, we have a program and the next question is how do we run it? In Scratch, we click the green flag to make all the sprites run their own code. In Replit, to run our Python program, we click this big green ‘Run’ button up top here. Now, if you look the right side of the screen, you will see message “Hello, world” being printed out. Awesome! Click ‘Run’ a few more times, and ‘Hello, world!’ is printed out a few more times! So this window where message is printed is called a ‘Console’. Everything you print in the program is going to be shown here. If too many messages are printed, you can always cleanup the console by clicking this little trashcan icon in the ‘Console’ tab. Phew, all messages are gone and the Console is clean again. Just for fun, let’s print another message, at the end of the first print, hit return and let’s type in “print(’This is my first program!’)”. Ok, if we run it again, we now see two lines of messages in the Console: ‘Hello, world!’ and ‘This is my first program!’ Nice!
* So far, we have shown you one way of writing and running Python program: you type code into a .py file, click ‘Run’ and the results are shown in the Console. The is often called ‘script’ mode, because you write a complete program first, which sometimes is called a ‘script’, and then run it to get the result. That’s all good. But there is a second way to write and run Python code. Next to the Console tab, there is another tab called ‘Shell’. Click it and the window switched to a different one. OK, there are some wired characters here. But don’t worry and it’s not important to understand here. What I do want you to do here is, right after the dollar sign, type in ‘python’ and hit return. Now, there are some more information coming up, you can just ignore them. The important thing is we have now entered Python’s ‘interactive’ mode, because things are going to be, well, a lot more interactive here. What do I mean by that? Can you see these three greater than signs in this line? This is called a “Prompt” and you can type in any python code after the prompt and make it run right away. Let’s try out! Say I also want to print “Hello, World!” again. After the prompt, type in ‘print(”Hello, world”)’ as before. Now, hit return, the printed message is shown immediately in the next line! How cool is that! Also notice that the prompt is shown again after the text, ready for the next line of Python code. So, let’s print ‘This is my first program’ and it gets printed again! See how interactive this is? It’s kind of like chatting to someone: you ask something and then get the response back right away! 
* This is so fun and I can’t stop playing with it! Let’s try something new! A lot of people use Python as a calculator, because you can ask it to do all kinds of math operations. For example, in the next prompt, if I type in “1+2” and hit return, see, Python immediately gives the result back, which is “3”. You can do other operations such as, subtraction, multiplication and division. Again, we will dive deeper into Python’s math operations later in the course.
* OK, so we have seen two different modes to write and run Python programs. So, you might be wondering: why do we have two modes and what each one is good for? Can anyone have a guess? OK, because the interactive mode is quick and responsive, it is very good to write and experiment small snippets of code if you are not sure what they do. As I mentioned before, it’s like chatting with some, if there’s something you are not clear about, just ask him or her, and get a response right away. However, if there is topic that you want to write a full article about, it’s unlikely that you are going to do it by chatting with someone. Instead, you probably gonna go somewhere quiet, sit down, recall what you have learn previously when chatting with someone, and then start writing word by word, sentence by sentence. Once you are done with the entire article, you then give it to someone for a read or publish it somewhere. And this is pretty much what is the ‘script’ mode is about. So in summary, if you want small code and quick response, use ‘interactive’ mode and if you want to write an entire complex python program, use ‘script’ mode.
* OK, that pretty much complete our quick and dirty introduction to replit. You should now be able to create a new repl, write some very simple code and run it. Just before we leave and move on to an offline editor, I just want to make sure you have two options set in replit. If you take a look at the right side where it says ‘Tools’, scroll to the bottom, and find the ‘User Settings’, click it, now a new tab is gonna show up on the left side with a lot of settings about replit that you can play with. One settings we want to change is this ‘Indentation Size’, it’s set to 2 by default, but I want you to change it to 4. The other setting is the next one ‘Wrapping’, it’s set to ‘softwrap’ by default, and I want to you change it to ‘none’. So basically, these two settings make your code look nicer.  |
| Visual Studio Code: Introduction | Ok, even though replit is a very nice tool, simple to use and quick to start, but unfortunately, it has a major drawback: when the internet connection is bad, it’s a pain to use. Everything can become so slow that it’s almost unusable. This is not something specific to Replit, every online editor suffers from the same problem. This problem becomes more apparent when we start creating games when there are a lot of a graphics and animations. So we need a different option, one that does not depend on the quality of your internet connection. And from Scratch, we know that an offline editor is exactly what we need. You install the editor locally on your computer, so that you can code anytime as long as you have the computer available, even without internet connection at all.
* For writing Python code, there are a lot of offline editors out there. Some are very simple and basic, mostly used for education purposes, whereas some are really powerful used for developing real world software. In this course, I want to strike a balance between simplicity and powerfulness. A simple editor is good for beginners to start with, but as you learn more and more, and start to write more complex programs, a simple editor can start to show its limitations. On the other hand, I also don’t want the editor to be unnecessarily complex, as that can look daunting and put beginners off. 
* So, I have chosen Visual Studio Code for this course. This is a very powerful editor created by Microsoft. It’s can be used to code in a wide range of programming languages, not just Python. So it is popular choice for even professional software engineers to develop large applications. Fortunately, as powerful as it sounds, it is actually not that difficult to setup and use. Just like Replit, yes, there are a ton of features, but to get a simple Python program up and running, you just need to install and set up a few things! And we are going to do just that in the rest of this lesson.  |
| Visual Studio Code: Installing Python | * Ok, so to be able to use Visual Studio Code on our computer to write and run Python programs, we need two pieces of software: the first one is Python itself, and the other one is the Visual Studio Code editor. Let’s install them one by one.
* Normally, you would go to the Python and Visual Studio Code official websites to download the files and install them. But luckily, I have prepared both for you already. Just open the class folder, go to ‘Software Installer’, you should see two files: one is called ‘python.exe’ and the other one is called ‘vscode.exe’. These are the installation files for python and visual studio code. We are going to run both to install them on our computer.
* First, let’s install Python. Double click the ‘python.exe’ file, this should open up a window to guide you through the entire installation process. On the initial page where is says ‘Install Python 3.12.4 (64-bit)’, I want you to check the box that says ‘Add python.exe to PATH’. Once you have done that, click the first option that says ‘Install Now’. Ok, it is now installing python, we just need to wait for a few minutes before it’s done! Right, if everything is fine, then it will show this successful page and we can close the window by clicking the ‘Close’ button. 
* OK, how do we double check that Python has indeed been installed successfully? Pretty simple, go to the Windows search bar at the bottom, type in ‘cmd’ and hit return. Now, you should see a black window popping up. Does this look familiar? Yes, it kind of looks like the console we have seen in Replit, right? And actually, it is a console for the Windows system. So, with such a console and Python installed, we should be able to go into Python’s interactive mode, right? Can anyone tell me how to do so? Yes, we just type in ‘python’ and hit return. Voila! We have seen those information again and the prompt! So we can now test some very simple Python program here! Let’s print ‘Hello World!’ again! And there you go, message ‘Hello, world!’ has been printed on the console. Cool! Looks like python is working perfectly! By the way, to exit the interactive mode, type in ‘quit()’ after the prompt and hit return. We are back out again. Nice! |
| Visual Studio Code: Installing VS Code | * Ok, next we need to install Visual Studio Code. By the way, because ‘Visual Studio Code’ is a very long name to say each time, so I will call it ‘VS Code’ instead from now on. If you still have the folder open, take a look at the other file called ‘vscode.exe’. Same with the python file, double click it to start the installation process. 
* A new window pops up, and the first page shows you the terms, just click ‘I aggree the terms’ and then ‘next’. The next page shows you where vscode is going to be installed on your computer, we are not going to change the location, the default is fine, and click ‘next’. The next page says it’s going to add vscode to the window start menu, that’s fine, click ‘next’, this page shows a few more options, the default is fine, continue by clicking ‘next’, on the final page, just click ‘install’. And we just need to wait for a few minutes before everything is done. And there you go, vs code has been successfully installed. Now there is a checkbox that says run vscode now, let’s leave it on and click ‘finish’.
* Now, vscode should open up and you should see this welcome page here. The important thing here is to choose a Color Theme you like. By default, vscode’s color theme is set to this ‘Dark Modern’ one. Of course, you can choose a lighter one if that’s what you prefer. But I like the dark mode so I’m not gonna change it. Then we can just close this ‘Welcome’ tab. Ok, let me first show you how you can close and reopen vscode. Let’s close it first. Now, go to Window’s search bar at the bottom of the screen, type in ‘vscode’, then Visual Studio Code is going to show up in the search result, just click it and that should open up vscode again. Each time you open vscode, it’s going to show you the ‘welcome’ tab and a ‘Release Notes’ tab. These are not important and we can close both.  |
| Visual Studio Code: Class Folder Structure | * OK, before actually starting to use vscode, let’s first take a look at how all the files for our python course is organized. If you open the course folder ‘Introduction to Python’, you will see a lot of subfolders inside. We have already seen the ‘Software Installer’ folder where the installation files for Python and VSCode are stored. Then we have 18 other folders, each one for a lesson. For example, the first one lesson, which is the one we having now, is called ‘Lesson 0 - Welcome and Setup’. Now, each lesson folder contains all the files that we need for that particular lesson, these can be the actual python program, that is the .py files, but can also be some image files or sound files for some later game projects.
* Let’s open the ‘Lesson 0’ folder, it has two subfolders, one of called ‘Project’, this is where the python code, images files and sound files are stored. The other one is called ‘Notes’ where I have put all the lesson notes related to this lesson. The notes are for you to read before and after the lesson, and it contains various exercises for you to attempt as well. Let’s then open the ‘Project Folder’, it has four subfolders: ‘Code’, where we store all the python .py files, ‘Data’ where we store all the data files used by the program, ‘Images’ where we store all the image files used by the program and ‘Sounds’ where we store all the sound files used by the program. Because this is our first python lesson and we are doing nothing complicated here, so ‘Data’, ‘Images’ and ‘Sounds’ folders are all empty. So let’s take a look at the ‘Code’ folder. There is a single file called ‘[main.py](http://main.py)’ in it. Remember, in Replit, when you create a new Repl, it comes with a ‘main.py’ file. And this is that file, I have created for you. 
* Now, if you spend some time and take a look at all the other lesson folders, you will find that they all have the same structure. And they all the a ‘main.py’ file in the ‘Code’ folder. The only difference is that, for some lessons, there might be some extra files in the ‘Data’, ‘Images’ and ‘Sounds’ folders. Later in the course, I will should you how to use those files. But for now, simply understanding how all the files of the course are organized is more than enough. |
| Visual Studio Code: Script Mode | * Ok, we have a [main.py](http://main.py) file in our lesson folder, let’s now see how to open it, change it and run it in vscode. Back to the editor, if you take a look at the upper left corner, there is a menu called ‘File’. Click it and it opens up a list menu. Go down the list, find and click the one called ‘Open Folder’, this brings up a folder selection window where you can find the folder you want to open. For us, the folder we want to open is the ‘Project’ folder of this lesson. For me, my course folder ‘Introduction to Python’ is on the desktop, so I will go there first, click the double click that folder, and then double click the ‘Lesson 0’ folder. We can now see the ‘Project’ folder and the ‘Notes’ folder. Because the ‘Project’ folder is the one we want to open, so let’s select that, don’t double click it, as that will open this folder up. Once it’s selected, clikc the ‘Select Folder’ button here. Vscode might ask if you want to trust the author, just click ‘Yes, I trust the authors’, and then this folder is open up as you can see from the left side. Here you should see all four folders inside the ‘Project’ folder. You can expand each folder by clicking the little arrow next to the folder name. For example, if I expand the ‘Code’ folder, I can then see my main.py file inside.  Expanding the other three folders does not show anything because we have nothing in them yet.
* Ok, we can see the main.py file now, if you click it, you will notice that a new tab is open in the main section of vscode. This is the file area of vscode. You can open any file as a new tab and it’s content is going to be shown here. For our main.py, we do not have any code yet so let’s add some!
* This should now look and feel pretty much the same as Replit. Let’s type in ‘print(”Hello, World!”)’. There you go, we have our first Python program written in vscode. Cool! Also, it important that you save your code or file regularly, because if you don;t do so and your computer crashes, you might lose some or all of your work. So save the changes we have made to our main.py file, again, open up the ‘File’ menu, scroll down to where it says ‘Save’ and click it. Now your program is saved on your computer and won’t be lost even if your computer crashes. If you take a look at the ‘Save’ option again, it says ‘Ctrl + S’ here, this is the shortcut key combination for saving a file, meaning, anytime you to save the file, just press ‘Ctrl’ plus the ‘S’ key on your keyboard, and that should save your file as well. So it’s always a good practice to press those two keys regularly when you code.  
* Ok, time to run our code! Ohh…but wait, in Replit, we have a big green button that says ‘Run’, but where is that button in vscode? Unfortunately, vscode does not come with the ability to run python code straight out of the box. But the good news is that making it to do so is not that difficult at all. If you take a look at the very left column of the editor, you will see some icons, hover your mouse over and a small text pops up to tell you what that icon is about. For example, the one that is currently being selected here, with an icon of two sheets of paper, is the Explorer. It is the one that shows all the folders and files we currently open. The next one with a magnifying glass is Search, it allows you to search for things in our project. The one that I’m going to show you is the last one, with an icon of four small squares that says ‘Extensions’. An extension is something that adds extra functionality to vscode. Think about the extensions in Scratch, it allows you to do a lot more cool stuffs with the original editor, right? Same here, there are many many cool extensions for vscode as well. And it turns out that running Python is one of those cool things! So let’s click that icon. Now, this section has changed from something showing our folders and files to something that shows all the extensions. As I said, there are a ton of extensions out there. The one we need here is called ‘Code Runner’. To find that, go to this search box up to, and type in ‘Code Runner’, the first one that shows up in the search result is what we need. Just click this little blue ‘Install’ button to install this extension. This can take a while, and once it’s done, a new tab called ‘Extension: Code Runner’ opens up next to our ‘main.py’ tab. This is some detail information about what this extension is and how to use it. You can read it through if you are interested, but that not necessary, because we are only going to use a very small part of it. So let’s close this tab first. To go back to view where all of our folders and files are shown, just click this ‘Explorer’ icon again and we are back.
* Ok, we have installed a new extension called ‘Code Runner’, now what? Can we run our code now? Sure! Although it might not be apparent to you, but we actually have a new button here! See this little triangle here? It was not here before! And this is the big green ‘Run’ button in vscode. Ok, it’s not big and and it’s not green, but it’s for running a program, so who cares! Now, if we click it, a new panel appears at the bottom with a tab named ‘OUTPUT’. In the tab, a bunch of information has been printed out. You can pretty much ignore everything else except the text  in white, which is exactly what we have printed in the program: ‘Hello, World!’. So like the Console in Replit, this OUTPUT tab is where  you can check program result in vscode. Now you can hide the OUTPUT tab and actually the entire panel by clicking this close button here. This creates more space when we code. Let’s add our second print: ‘This is my first program!’. And let’s run it again by clicking this run button. Ok, this time, we see two message being printed. Also, if you scroll up, you can still see the output from our first run. If too many messages are piling up, you can always clear them by clicking this button here, and the outputs are all gone. Cool! Also notice that there are a few more tabs besides “OUTPUT”: there is a “PROBLEMS” tab, a “DEBUG CONSOLE” tab, a ”TERMINAL” tab and a “PORTS” tab. We will be touching on some of them later in the course. |
| Visual Studio Code: Interactive More | * Ok, when learning Replit, we pointed out that there are two modes in Python, script mode and interactive mode? Can someone still remember what they are and how they differ? Yes, good. So of all the things we have done in vscode so far, which mode do you think that is? Yes, it is the script mode! We write the whole program and run it in one go!
* Now, I know you might be wondering, how can we write code in interactive mode in vscode? In Replit, there is a Shell window, where we type in ‘python’ and hit return to enter the interactive mode, right? So does vscode has a shell or something similar to a shell? The answer is definitely YES! Again, go to the menu called  ‘View’ and click it, this opens up a menu list, in the list, find an item called ‘Terminal’ and click it. Now, the panel at the bottom appears again, but this time, instead of the “OUTPUT” tab, the ‘TERMINAL’ tab is selected. This tab is just like the shell in Replit, you can type in ‘python’ and hit return. Without any surprise, this brings us into the interactive mode and you can type code after the prompt just like before. Once you are done, type in ‘quit()’ and hit return. Again, to close the entire panel to make more space for coding, just click this close button here. |
| Visual Studio Code: Summary | * So that’s it! That’s all you need to know about VS Code to start writing and running Python programs! Of course, there are a lot more features we have not talked about, but this is enough for the time being and we will definitely pick up more bits and pieces along the way.  |
|  | * Ok, so in this lesson, we have introduced two editors for writing and running python programs, the online one Replit and the offline one VS Code. Each has its strengths and weaknesses, and we will use both in this course. To be more specific, in the first half of the course, where we are learning the basics of the Python programming language, we will be using Replit. Because when there is no graphics and animations, the internet latency is not a big problem. In the second half of the course, when we start to build a lot of interactive games, we will switch to vscode to make sure the programs run smoothly and responsively. 
* So I really hope that everyone of you can play with both editors after the lesson, get yourself familiar with both, and see what other interesting things you can discover. So in the next lesson, we are going to start writing real Python programs and I will see you there!   |

### Explore

- How to add a new file in Replit?
- How to upload a new file in Replit?
- How to create a folder in Replit?
- How to upload a folder in Replit?
- What if you don’t have a file named ‘main.py’ in the repl?