# 1 Math Genius

### References

[Python coding projects for kids and teens | Hello world (raspberrypi.org)](https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/hello-world)

### Code Link

[My-Programming-Courses/Python/Level0/Basics/1 Math Genius/main.py at main · jguo108/My-Programming-Courses (github.com)](https://github.com/jguo108/My-Programming-Courses/blob/main/Python/Level0/Basics/1%20Math%20Genius/main.py)

### Key Points

- Numbers
    - Operators (+, -, *, /)
    - int and float (use ‘type’ function to check the type of a variable)
- String
    - What is a string
    - Difference between using single and double quotes for string (when printing greeting “Hello, I’m a Math Genius” and question “What’s your name?”. Both need to be enclosed in double quotes because they have single quote in the sentence.)
- Number and String
    - string vs. number
    - Conversion between number and string (built-in functions ‘int’ and ‘float’)
- Variable
    - Variable
    - Assignment
- Built-in function
    - What function is and how to call it.
    - Built in function “input” (what it reads is always a String)
    - Passing multiple argument to a built-in function
    - Built-in function returns value
    - ‘type’ function
- Misc
    - Joining strings (maybe later?)
    - Syntax of programming language

| Steps | Notes |
| --- | --- |
| Introduction | * Welcome to the first Python lesson. Hopefully, after last lesson, you know both Replit and VS Code pretty well and can’t wait to start writing your first real python program! 
* Today, we are going to create a Math Genius who can do some really challenging math calculations, i.e. addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. Let’s see it in action!
* When the program starts, our Math Genius is going to greet us with a message “Hello, I’m a Math Genius!” Then it’s  going to ask for our name, and let me type in “Jing”. After that, it says ”Hello, Jing!” and “Give me two numbers and I can add, subtract, multiply and divide them!”. Then it’s going to ask us for the two numbers, and I will type in 1 for the first number and 2 for the second number. And finally, it gives us the answers for all four operations, 3 for the sum, -1 for the difference, 2 for the product and 0.5 for the quotient! That was some serious math talent here! 
* Sound exciting? Let’s start today’s lesson! |
| Replit Setup | * As I mentioned in the last lesson, we are going to use the online editor Replit for the first half of the course. So let’s go to Replit’s home page and login with your email address and password. Now you should land on your home page. If you have followed what I did in the last lesson, you should a repl called ‘ReplitDemo’ in this home page. Since that one is just used for demonstration, we don’t need that any more and I want to delete it. So to delete a repl, just click this three little dots on the right, in the menu that pops up, select delete. And it’s going to ask whether you really want to delete this repl, I will just select ‘Yes, delete this repl’. And it’s gone. Now we have no repls at all.
* As the course moves along, we are going to have more and more projects, and it’s very important for us to organize these projects nicely. If you recall from last lesson when we introduced vscode, we organize everything into different levels of folders. And we shall do the same here. First, click the ‘Repls’ button to go tp the Repls page. Here is where you can find all your repls. Since we have none at the moment, this page is empty. Let’s create some folders
* First, click the ‘New folder’ button, let’s give it a title, “Introduction to Python” and click ‘Create Folder’. Now, we can see a new folder called ‘Introduction to Python’. Click it to going into this folder. Inside this folder, let’s create a repl for this lesson. Click the ‘New Repl’ button, for the template, select ‘Python’ and for the title, let’s call it ‘Lesson 1 - Math Genius’ and Create repl. Ok, after a few seconds, we have this new repl open up in the editor. The [main.py](http://main.py) file is open in the tab and let’s start to write some code! |
| Print greeting message | * Ok, from the first lesson, we already know how to ask Python to print out some message. Let’s print a greeting message from our math genius first. Use a print function, then a pair of brackets and give it a string “Hello, I’m a Math Genius”. Remember from last lesson, a string is just some text in quotes. Let’s run this. Click run and we get the output in the Console. Cool! |
| Introduction to function | * Before we move on, I want stop for a minute and really explain what a function is, because this is such an important concept in not just Python, but pretty much all programming languages. In the last lesson when talking about the ‘print’ function, I ask you to think of it as an actual printer. This is useful to get some initial impression of what a function is. But since there might a million functions in Python, it can become quite hard to come up with a real object for each. We need a better explanation. So what exactly is a ‘function’? A function is like an instruction you give to a computer to for it to follow and do something. For the ‘print’ function, it’s an instruction to ask the computer to print something on the screen. Giving such instruction is often referred to as ‘Calling a Function’. So you will often hear me saying ‘let’s call the print function’. 
* An important thing is that, whenever you call a function, you always need to follow the function name with a pair of brackets. Let’s open the Shell and go into the interactive mode for a moment. First, let’s just type ‘print’ and hit return. Notice the result? Instead of printing something, python gives a strange message that says “builit-in function print”. What does that mean? Well, the thing is that if you just type in a function name without the brackets, Python actually thinks that you want to know what this is. So trying to be helpful, it tells you exactly what it is: a built-in function called print. Here, the ‘built-in’ means this function comes with Python for free. You can just pick it up and use it without doing anything. Later on, we will see another type of functions that you, the programmer, create yourself. It does not come for free and you have to work hard on it. But that’s for later. Back to the Shell. Ok, now if we follow the ‘print’ with a pair of brackets, what do you think it does this time? Yes, it’s calling the ‘print’ function, or in other words, we are giving python the instruction to print something on the screen. Let’s hit return and see what happens. Hmmm…this time, we do not see the previous message, looks like we are indeed calling the function and not asking python what this is. That’s good. But there is nothing being printed, it’s just an empty line before the next prompt! Why is that? Well, if you gonna ask the computer to print something for you, you better also give it the thing to print, right? Otherwise, how on earth can the computer knows what to print? It’s like asking a chef to cook a meal for me, at least give him/her all the ingredients to cook with, right? And this leads to another important concept related to function, that is   
argument. Ok, don’t be fooled by the scary name, it simply refers to the things you give to a function when calling it. Remember, previously when we call ‘print’, we give it the text we want to print as a string and put it in between the brackets, right? In this case, this string is an argument we passed to the print function. Now, it should be clear why nothing is being printed here: it is because we have not passed any argument to the ‘print’ function when calling it. So let give it an argument. Let’s say print “We are passing an argument this time!” and hit return. There you go, this time, we have this string printed out on the screen.
* So this is all about what a function is, what does it mean by calling a function, what is an argument, and how to pass one to a function when you call it. Of course, there are more details about functions that we have not touched on yet, but we will learn those as we continue the course.  |
| Ask for name input | * Ok, back to our Math Genius! After that initial greeting, it is going to print a message asking for our name. Hmmm….print a message, I know how to do it! print(“What is you name?”). Job done! Let’s run it! Ok, it greets us, and asking “What’s your name?” Ok, we’ve got a problem: the program just ends and we didn’t even have a chance to give our name! So we need a way to let Python ask us for something!
* Ok, for those of you who have learnt Scratch, can you recall how a sprite can ask something from us? Yes, we use the “ask” block. It gives us a text box where we can type in our reply, right? In Python, we want to do something similar. But how? Well, just like we can use the “print” function to output something, we can also use another function to take in something. And guess what it is called? Yes, it’s called “input”, what else would you want to call it? By the way, this is a also a built-in function, meaning you can just grab it and start using it for free!

* Before we use this function in our code, let’s first go to our playground to get to know it better. Back to the Shell, let’s just type in ‘input’ and hit return. Aha, we have seen something similar before, this time, Python tells us this is a built-in function called ‘input’. Ok, we know what it is. But what we really want it to use this function, or trying to be a little bit more formal, we want to “call this function”. How do you call a function? Yes, the brackets! Let’s add that and run it again! Ok, this time, we do not see the previous message. But the interesting thing is that the prompt is gone too! Aren’t we supposed to get a new prompt after running each line of code in the interactive mode? What is going on here? Well, what is happening now is, Python is thinking “Hmmm… this guy calls the ‘input’ function, so he must be giving me some input, maybe I shall just wait and not show the next prompt yet!” So Python is actually wait for our input. Let’s give it some. l will just type in my name “Jing Guo” and hit return. Voila, my name “Jing Guo” is printed out again in the next line and the prompt is back! 

* Now the immediate question is: why the name is printed out again? Well, we now know that when calling a function, you can pass an argument to it, right? Using the chef analogy again, when you ask a chef to cook a meal for you, you need to give him/her all the ingredients. Now, what should happen when the meal is done? Yes, the chef should hand it back to you so that you can start eating it, right? Same with functions, functions taking in arguments, but when the task is done, it can gives us the result back too! And this result is often called the “return value” of a function. Now, unlike the “print” function, which does not give us anything back after print the string to the screen, the “input” function does return a value, and that value is whatever we typed in. In this case, it’s my name “Jing Guo”. When we are in Python’s interactive mode, it will just print out any return value from a function. This is exactly why we are seeing my name being printed again. Also notice that this name is inside a pair of quotes. We have learnt before that anything with a pair of double quotes surrounding it is a string. But what about a pair of single quotes? It turns out that in Python, you can use either a pair of doubles quotes or a pair of single quotes for strings. I personally like double quotes, but of course, you can choose whichever one you like, just to be consistent, meaning if you choose one, stick with it and don’t mix single and double quotes together. There will be some rare cases where you have to use one over the other, and I will explain that when they come up. So, since “Jing Guo” is in a pair of single quotes, it is also a string. Actually, we can say that the ‘input’ function takes whatever you type in and always return it as a string. We could even try numbers, for example, when I type in number 10 this time, notice the return value is 10 but in quotes, so this is not a number anymore, but a string that happens to have a character 1 followed by another character 0. Please keep this in mind as we will see why later in the lesson. 

* Ok, right now, when the ‘input’ function is run, all we have is just an empty line waiting for our input. It would be nicer if it can tell us what it expecting. For example, if it is expecting a name, it could print out a message such as “What is your name?” Then for us, it becomes clear that we should type in a name here instead of something else. Luckily, like the ‘print’ function, the input function can also take in an argument. This argument is going to be a string that gets printed out before we can start giving our input. Let’s try this out. This time, I’m gonna call ‘input’ and pass a string “What’s your name?”. Hit return. 
Aha, this time, instead of an empty line, which can be confusing, python now prints out a question asking for our name. Let me type in “Jing Guo” again and everything stays the same. Cool!

* Now we have understood how ‘input’ works and how to use it, let’s leave our playground and add this code into our file. Once this done, let’s run it by clicking the ‘Run’ button. Ok, we have the greeting message, and let’s type in the name and hit return. Hmmm….this time we are not seeing the name being printed back on the screen again. This is because, python will only show the return value of a function when in interactive mode. If we run the entire program in script mode, the return value will not be printed automatically.  |
| Store input name to a variable | * Problem: So here we have a problem. Because that the Math Genius is supposed to do is that it takes the name we typed in and created a custom greeting message. For example, if I type in my name “Jing Guo”, it should then print a greeting message “Hello, Jing Guo”.  To print the “Hello” part is easy, we just call ‘print’ and pass the string “Hello, ” to it.  But to print the name, we first need to know where the name has gone. 
* Solution: Ok, when we introduced the ‘input’ function, we used the ‘ask’ block in Scratch for comparison and showed that they are essentially the same thing. If you can still remember from the Scratch class, when we type in a reply and click the tick button, where does that reply go? Anyone? Yes, it is stored in a block called ‘answer’. And this ‘answer’ block is just a special variable that is used specifically to store the answer from an ‘ask’ block. Back to Python, when the “input” function received what we typed in and returned the value, we have not used anything to store that value. So it simply disappeared into nothingness, gone forever and we can never find it again. So the solution is to store the returned name from the “input” function somewhere so that we can use it later on, for example, when printing it. For those of you who have taken the Scratch course would immediately say “Ha, we need a variable here!” If that is you, congratulations! You have managed to transfer what you have learnt in Scratch into a new programming language. Well done!  But I also understand that this could be your very first programming course or maybe you just want to refresh on what variable is. So bear with me, let’s talk about variable once again.
* What is a variable?  You can think of variable as a box. You can put anything into that box. In real life, this would be things like fruit, snacks or toys, whatever. Now, the reason it’s called “variable” is because what is inside that box can be changed as you wish. For example, you might initially have 5 toy cars in a box, then add one more to have 6 cars. You can also take out 4 cars and leave with 2 cars.  You can even dump out all the cars, and put chocolate bars instead. So not only the number of things can change, the kind of things in the box can be changed too! Now, image having a few of those boxes, each look the same from the outside, it can be hard to tell which one stores what, just imagine trying to find the box will all the toy cars. This is where a “label” comes in pretty handy. All you need to do is just to stick a label onto the box and write down what is inside. For toy cars, you can just write “toy cars” on the label.

* Ok, enough of boxes, let’s come back to the world of Python. In Python, we need to store things all the time. And the box we use is called a “variable”. The word “vary” means “change”, so “variable” mean “thing that can change”. Instead of storing toy cars or chocolate bars, variables are used to store value or ‘data’, that is any information you need in the program, could be numbers or strings. 

* Let’s go back to our playground and take a look at some examples. In Scratch, we create a variable by clicking the “Make variable” button and then give it a name. Well, luckily, it is a lot easier in Python. If I want to create a variable to store a name, I can just type in the word “name”, this is the name of the variable, or the label of a box. Now, let’s what would happen if I just hit return and run this code. Ouch, something has gone wrong. Now, this is very typical Python error message and you would probably see quite a lot of them as you write more and more code. The ‘Traceback’ part of it is essentially telling you where that error happens. For this small example, since we have just one line of code, we can ignore it as it is pretty clear where the error is. But for large programs, this can be very useful in locating the problem. Now, the last line is where Python tells you exactly what the error is. In the case, it says “NameError: name ‘name’ is not defined”. First, the word “define” is used by Python to mean “create”. So creating a variable is the same as defining a variable. Therefore, this message is Python complaining that you have not created a variable called ‘name’. But why is that? We have already typed in the variable name, right? How come it is not created?  Well, as it turns out, in python, you are not allowed to create a variable without giving it any value, or in other words, creating an empty box. So how do we store a value into a variable? We use the ‘=’ symbol, followed by the value to store. For example, if I want to store name “Jing Guo” into variable “name”, I would type <name = Jing Guo>. Unlike its use in Maths, where an equal symbol means the left is equal to the right, in Python it is called “assignment”, which means assigning the value on the right to the variable on the left, or think of it as putting the thing on right into the box on the left. Let’s hit return and see what happens. 
* Problem: Oops, we have another error! This time, python highlighted the code that causes the error and tells us that it’s a SyntaxError. First of all, as you write more and more code in Python, you will be seeing this “syntax error” very often. Please don’t panic! Next, what is a “syntax error”, or what is “syntax”? Well, when you move from Scratch into Python, or any text-based programming language, you will hear people saying “syntax” a lot. The formal definition of “syntax” is the arrangement of words and phrases to create well-formed sentences in a language. Phew…I think an example might be better at explaining this. Since it has to do with a language, let’s use a example in English. In English, I would say “I eat an apple”, right? This is the correct order of the words and you can easily understand its meaning. But if I say “Eat I apple an”, well, this time, it sounds like complete garbage and you might not get it right away. See? There are certain rules that you need to follow in any language to create a correct sentence for people to understand. And because Python, being a programming language, is also a language, it also has rules that you need to follow so that the computer can understand it. For example, one common mistake python beginners often make is to forget a quote when creating a string. Let’s say I create a string “Hello”, but miss the closing quote, Python would then complain with a syntax error. It also gives you a more detailed description of the error, “unterminated string literal”, which basically means you are missing a closing quote! This is just one of Python’s syntax rule and there are a lot of them. But don’t worry, you don’t have to memorize them all, you will pick them up bit by bit as you go through the course and write more and more code and make more and more errors. 
* Solution: So back to our original syntax error. This time the error description is not very helpful, it simply just says “invalid syntax”.  But luckily, the error is also pretty obvious, remember, the name “Jing Guo” is supposed to be a string, right? So can you see what is missing here? Yes, we are missing the pair of quotes! String always needs be in quotes! So all we need to do is just to add quotes around the name and hit return. Well, there is nothing on the screen this time, but the good news is that the syntax error is gone!
* You know what, we have already created a variable called “name” and store the string “Jing Guo” in it! How do I know that? Well, just type in the name of the variable in the prompt, “name”, and hit return. See? Python shows the current value in that variable! Ok, a variable is called a “variable” because you can change what is stored inside. To do that, you use the equal sign assignment again. For example, let’s assign “Elon Musk” to the name variable, remember to put the name in quotes. Now, if we type in “name” and hit return again, it shows “Elon Musk” this time, the string stored in this variable has changed. One interesting thing about Python variable is that, you can assign pretty much anything to it. For our “name” variable, it is not limited to only storing strings, for example we can store numbers, if we type in <name = 59>, Python will happily accept that and store 59 in it. Now if we type “name” and hit return, it shows its current value 59! Ok, here I have to point out, just because you can do it does not mean you should do it! What we have just done is considered very bad practice. Think about it, the variable is called “name” and you expect its value being a string that represents a name of some sort, right? But then later find out it is actually a number! What a surprise! Sometimes surprise is a good thing in life, but it is never the case in programming! Sorry! It’s like when you see a box labelled “chocolate”, only to find out brocoli inside later on. How disappointing! So, never do that and you won’t be wrong!
* Ok, now we know what a variable is, we can use it to store the value returned from the “input” function, which is the name we typed in. How to store a value to a variable? Yes, use assignment, the left side is the variable storing the value, that we call “name”, and the right side is the value to store, in this case, the return value from calling function “input”. Let’s put that on the right side. This entire line now says: call function “input”, store whatever value it returns into a variable called “name”.  |
| print a string plus a variable | * Ok, we have the name in variable “name”, next let’s print it to the screen. We already know to print something: you use the ‘print’ function. But previously, we always use ‘print’ with a string. So how do we print a variable? Now this is the magic about variables: once you have a variable storing some value, every time you need that value, you can just use that variable instead. Let see an example: Here I already have a variable called ‘name’ that stores a string “Jing Guo”. Now if I want to print the string “Jing Guo”, before using variable, I need to write <print(”Jing Guo”)>. But since now I have a variable that stores the exact same string, I can just do <print(name)>.  And this also gives me the same output. So in our code, right after the “input” function, let’s print “name”.
* Test. Let’s run the code.  Ok, “what’s your name?” type in “Jing Guo”, and it prints “Jing Guo”. Cool!
* But since this line is supposed to be a greeting message, we need more than just the name. We want some message like “Hello, Jing Guo”. For that, we need to print a sentence with two strings joining together: the first part “Hello, ” and the second part the “name” variable. So how can we join strings together? Let’s play with that a little bit!
* Let’s first think about it, to join a string to another one, you are essentially ADDING it to the end of the other string, right? What would be the best way to represent adding something to another thing? Yes, the “+” symbol. So joining two strings is as simple as putting a “+” symbol between them, like adding two numbers. Say I want to join the twos strings “Hello, ” and “Jing Guo”. All I need to do is just add “+” symbol between them and hit return, voila, we now have a new string “Hello, Jing Guo”. This works with variables too. Let’s create a variable “name” and assign “Jing Guo” to it. Now, let’s create a string by adding “name” to “Hello, ” and hit return, cool, we get the same result. Cool! Ok, for those of you who know about Scratch, can you recall seeing something similar? Yes, in Scratch, there is a “join” block that does exactly the same thing: it joins two thing together, whether it be strings or numbers. See? Different programming languages always share a lot, and it is very important for you to make such connections when learning. 
* So Let’s add this in our code script. Instead of just printing “name”, let’s print string “Hello, ” plus “name”.
* Test. Let’s run it. Type in “Jing Guo” and now it says “Hello, Jing Guo”. Nice!
* OK. So this is one way of printing a more complex string. Essentially, we join multiple strings to create a longer one and print it out at the end. But when it comes to the “print” function, there is a second way. So far, we always pass a single string or a single argument to the ‘print’ function. But as it turns out, you can give the “print” function more than one argument, in fact ‘print’ is so special that you can pass any number of arguments. And it will print those arguments one after the other. Let’s see how this works. What we need to print are two strings, “Hello,” and the name, so we can just pass these two strings as two arguments to the “input” function directly: the first argument is the string “Hello,”,  and the second argument is the “name” variable. Now, we are having some red squiggly line under the “print” function. Whenever you see this, it is Python telling you that something is not quite right. If this happens, try to hover your mouse over the squiggly line, a small window pops up showing you what went wrong. This time it says “SyntaxError: Unexpected token ‘name’”. Ok, we have another syntax error, meaning the code violates certain rule and Python cannot understand it. But still, the error message is not very clear or helpful. Hmmm… Let’s run the program and see what happens. Ok, this time the message is much more useful! Python highlights the “print” function again, this is nothing new because we already suspect that something is not quite right here. What is interesting is the error message, this time, it says “SyntaxError: invalid syntax. Perhaps, you forgot a comma?” Wowwowwow, it seems that we are missing a comma somewhere. But where? Now, here is something important, when you pass more than one argument to a function, you have to separate them by commas. For example, we are passing a string and a variable here, so we need a comma in between to separate them out from each other! And once we do that, the red squiggly line is gone! And if we run the program again, no error and we see the greeting message. Cool. 
* So let’s pause for a minute and look back at these two approaches, even though they might look very similar, after all, they are just differ by one single symbol. But they have very different meaning, the first one is using the “+” character to join two strings into one string and pass that as a single argument to the “print” function, the second one is using the comma to separate the two strings and passing them as two parameters to the “print” function.  |
| Print out sum, difference, product and quotient message | * OK, now it’s time for the Math Genius to shine. It’s going to ask us for two numbers and then do a series of calculation to impress us. Let’s first print a message “Give me two numbers and I can work out the sum, difference, product and quotient of them!”. 
* Test. Cool.
* Before we go ahead let the user input two numbers, I want to first address a small problem. This is very long sentence and I have to scroll left and right to see what all of it. It would be better if I can split it up into multiple shorter strings, each in a separate line, and then join them together. Well, we already know how to join multiple strings, all we need to do is to split this long sentence up. That’s easy, let’s say we want to split it up here after the word “numbers”,  just add a quote after it to matches up with the quote at the beginning. Of course, the rest of the sentence is no longer a string now because it is not in a pair of quotes. No problem! Just add another quote in front of the word ”and” to match up with the quote at the end. Now, we have two new strings and to join them, just add a “+” symbol in between. After that, we can just put the cursor in front of the second string and hit return. Now it goes to the next line and the first string is now short enough to fit on the screen. But the second string is still too long. No problem! Just split it up again. Same process, add a quote after the word “product”, and before the word “and”, now we have the second and the third strings. Add a plus symbol between them and move the third string down. Voila! Now the original long sentence has been split up into three shorter strings and each one fit onto the screen nicely.
* Test. Ok, let’s run this just to make sure everything still works the same. Type in name and there you go, we have the exact same sentence. So nothing seem to have changed as far as the user is concerned. Nice!
* Now, I want to show you a trick: when you want to join multiple strings, you don’t even need to have the “+” at all! Don’t believe me? Let’s delete the two “+” join the three strings. 
* Test. Run the program one more time, and as expected, everything still stays the same. Cool! |
| Input two numbers | * Right, now it’s time to give the Math Genius the two number it wants, one at a time. By now, you should already know how to take an input from a user, right? Yes, we use the “input” function. So to take the first number, let’s type in “input”, and we pass a string, “First number: ”,  that will be printed on the screen to make it clear that the Math Genius is expecting the first number. Now, this is going to wait for a user to enter a number. Just like asking for a user’s name, we need a variable to store the number returned from the “input” function. So let’s create or define a new variable called “num1”, which stands  for “number one”, and assign the returned value of this “input” function to it. 
* Test. Let’s test the program. Ok, it’s asking for the first number, let me type in 2, and hit return. Ok, nothing happens and the program ends. So how do we know the number has been successfully stored in variable “num1”? Well, for testing purpose, we can just add another “print” after the “input” to show the value of “num1”. Let’s run it again, this time, after we entered “2”, the program prints “2”, proving that variable “num1” indeed has value “2”. Nice!
* For the second number, the code is going to be very similar. So to save a little bit of time, we can highlight these two lines and press “Ctrl+C” on the keyboard to copy it, then go to a new line and press “Ctrl+P” to paste it. Note that you have to press both keys at the same time. Now, this is a good starting point, but we need to change a few things. First, the variable should be called “num2” this time becuase it is storing the second number, and the string passed to the “input” function should be changed to “Second number: ”. Finally, we print “num2” instead of “num1”. 
* Test. Ok, let’s give it a run. Now it asking for the first number, type in “2” and it shows “2”. Then it asks for the second number, type in “4” and it shows “4”. Perfect! Also, since we have shown that both variables have the correct values, we no longer need these two prints, just delete them. |
| Four basic operations in Python | * Now, with these two numbers, it’s finally time for Math Genius to get to work! Before that, let’s first see how we can do math operations in Python. 
* If you have learnt some basic maths, you should already know the four most basic operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. Each has its own specific operator. Python also has the same four operators, although some of them might look slightly different: addition and subtraction are the same “+” and “-” symbols; but multiplication is the “*” symbol instead of the “x” symbol and division is the “/” symbol instead of the “-” symbol.
* Let’s see how they work. Back to the interactive shell, let’s first type in 1 + 1. Unsurprisingly, it comes back with result “2”. Ok, how about 4 - 3, and the result is 1. Then 5*6 and it is 30. Finally, 10/2, and the result is 5. As you can see, basic math operations is very straightforward in Python, just make sure you use the correct operators. In fact, some people even use Python as a calculator because it actually has a lot more powerful math operators other than the four basic ones here. But the four basic ones are enough for now. 
* Also, I would like to point out that these operators can be used with numbers directly as well as variables that store numbers. For example, if we create a variable “a” and assign 3, then create another variable “b” and assign 7, then I can type “a * b” and get 21 as the result. Now, watch, if I now assign a different number “5” to variable “b” and computer “a * b” again, what do you think the result is going to be this time? Yes, it’s going to be 15, because the value that is stored in variable “b” has been changed to 5 and now “a * b” is equivalent to “3 * 5”, so the result is 15. Remember, whenever you use a variable, whatever value that is currently stored inside is going to be used.  |
| Add two numbers and print the result | * Ok, now we have two numbers in variables “num1” and “num2” and we also know how to do basic math operations, it’s time for the Math Genius to shine!
* First, it is going to compute the sum of these two numbers, this is as simple as “num1 + num2”, and let’s print the result on the screen.
* Test. Let’s run it. Type in “4” for the first number, hit return, and “2” for the second number, hit return. * * Problem: Ok, we have the result, but wait, what? “42”? 4 + 2 equals to 42? Seriously? Looks like our Math Genius is not that clever after all! Let’s try again, this time we use 10 for the first number and 5 as the second number, and the result is 105? What is going on here? Try again, 6 and 20, and we get 620. Hmmm…the results are clearly all wrong, but there seems to be an interesting pattern here. Can you spot that? Yes, looks like the result is just those two numbers joining together, one after the other, like joining two strings! Looks like Python thinks the values in variables “num1” and “num2” are strings instead of numbers! How could that happen? 
* To understand this, let’s go to python shell again. We call the “input” function and assign its returned value to variable “num1”. Hit return, type in “4” and hit return again. So, variable “num1” should store number “4”, right? Or is it? In the shell, when you type in a variable name and hit return, Python is going to give you the value stored in that variable. So let’s check what is really stored in “num1”. Type in “num1” and hit return. Ok, it shows that the value is “4”. But, now I want your full attention, is this “4” a number or a string? Anyone? Why is it a string? Yes, because it is inside a pair of quotes! Doesn’t matter if it is double or single quotes, as long as something is in quotes, it is a string! Just to show you what a real number would look like, let’s create another variable “a” and assign 4 to it. Now, type in “a” and hit return. OK, we get “4” again, but, this time, take a look, there are no quotes around the number, meaning it’s not a string but an actual number!

*If you are still in doubt, there is an even better way to check that the value in ‘num1’ is indeed a string. Like ‘print’ and ‘input’, Python has another built-in function that tells you what type a value or a variable is: it is the ‘type’ function. Same with every function, we need a pair of brackets to call ‘type’. And inside the brackets, we pass a value or a variable whose type we want to know of as the argument. For example, if I pass a string “China” and hit return, it says “<class ‘str’>”, so “class” is the same as “type” and “str” is just short for “string”. This means the type of “China” is a string. Ok, now we can use the ‘type’ function to check the type of the return value from ‘input’. Since this value is now stored in variable ‘num1’, so let’s use <type(num1)> and hit return. Voila, it says “<class ‘str’>”, so this just confirms that the value stored in ‘num1’ is indeed a string. 

* Now, let’s input a second number and assign it to variable “num2”, I will type in “2” this time. Type “num2” and hit return. As you can see, this number is also in quotes, meaning it is also a string. And we can also confirm that by using <type(num2)>. So variables “num1” and “num2” now have values that are strings instead of numbers. It just happens to be strings with a character “4” and “2” respectively. 
* So, what would happen if you use the “+” operator with two strings? Yes, it simply joins those two strings together! Python will never add them because it thinks they are strings and not numbers! Let’s try, “num1 + num2” and  there you go, it’s a string where the first character is “4” and the second character is “2”. we know it is a string because “42” is also in quotes. As comparison, let’s create another variable “b” and assign number 2 to it. Now we have variable “a” storing a number “4” and variable “b” storing a number “2”. This time, when we do a + b, see, we get 6. This is because both variables “a” and “b” contains actual numbers, so the “+” operator performs addition instead of joining strings.

* Solution: Ok, let’s get back to our script. So the reason we are getting incorrect result is because “num1” and “num2” are actually storing strings that just happen to look like numbers. But why did that happen? When it’s asking for a number, we clearly typed in a number without quotes. Earlier when we first introduced the ‘input’ function, I have showed you that it takes your input, whatever that might be, and turns it into a string. So when I enter my name, it turns it into a name string; when I enter a number, it also turns that number into a string. In this case, it converts the numbers we entered for ‘num1’ and ‘num2’ into strings. As a result, when you later try to add ‘num1’ and ‘num2’, you are actually adding two strings, and adding two strings is the same as joining them together. So to store the actual numbers we entered into ‘num1’ and ‘num2’, we want to convert the return value from the ‘input’ function from string to number. Luckily in Python, just like “print” and “input”, there are also built-in functions that convert strings into numbers.

* But before we look at those functions, let’s first talk about the different types of numbers. In Math, we have “integers”, they are just whole numbers like -10, 0, 17 etc. We often use such numbers for counting, for example. There is another type of numbers call “decimals”, they are numbers with a decimal point, like 1.2, 7.85 etc. We often use decimal for measurement. For example, my height is 1.8 meters. Of course, there are other types of numbers in Math, but these two are the most common ones and used most often. Like in maths, Python divide numbers into different types, there is “int” that is the same as integer in Math and “float” that is the same as “decimals” in math. For this lesson, we focus on integers and talk about floats later in the course. 

* Ok, so the built-in function that converts a string into an integer in Python is called “int”, short for integer. It takes a string as argument, convert and return it as an integer. Let’s play with it a little bit in the shell. Since it is a function, we call it with a pair of brackets. Let’s pass variable ‘num1’ as the argument. Remember, ‘num1’ currently stores the string “4”. Hit return. Check this out, Python prints out the return value, which is 4, but the important difference is that this 4 no longer has quotes, meaning it is a number now! By the way, we can use the ‘type’ function to confirm that this is indeed an integer number. Let’s first save the returned value of <int(num1)> into a variable “result”. Then let’s call function “type” and pass “result” as the argument. Run the code, See? The type of variable “result is an integer number.

* Ok, back to our script. With the conversion function we have just learnt, all we need to do is to use them to convert the return value of the “input” function from a string to an integer. Let’s first rename our “num1” variable to “num1_str”, because this is going to store the first number as a string. Then we assign the returned value of the “input” function to it. Next, let’s convert “num1_str” into a integer using the “int” function and assign the returned value to variable “num1”. And let’s make the same change for the second number as well. 

* Ok, so let’s run this again. 4 for the first number and 2 for the second number. And the result is 6 this time, without quotes. Awesome!

We want to convert the return value of this “input” function into an integer. All we need to do is to call “int” and pass the entire “input” function as the parameter. OK, this now becomes a little bit complicated, so let me explain. What this is saying is: call function “input”, pass its return value as the parameter to call another function “int”. “int” then converts this parameter into an integer and assign its return value to variable “num1”. As you see, return value from a function can be used as a parameter to another function. After this, “num1” now contains an actual integer. We can do the same for “num2”. 

* Now, we can make the output a bit nicer by printing something like “The sum is: 6” just to make it clear what the number “6” means. Previously, we pass multiple string arguments to function “print”, and they are printed to the screen one after the other. But the argument don’t have to be strings, they can be integer numbers too! For the output here, we have a string “The sum is: ” and a number 6 to print. So we can just pass string “The sum is: ” as the first argument, and the result of num1 + num2 as the second argument. And always remember to separate them out by a comma.
* Test. Now let’s run it again, this time, we have a much nicer message, telling us that the sum is 6. |
| Remaining three operations | * Ok, so we have gone through all the tough parts of this lesson, what remains is just to have the Math Genius do the other three operations: subtraction, multiplication and division. They are all very similar to addition. So for subtraction, let’s copy this line and paste it. Then change the word from “sum” to “difference” and change the operator from “+” to “-”. 
* Test. Again, let’s use 4 and 2, so this time, the sum is 6 and the difference is 2, because 4 - 2 is 2. Cool!
* For the multiplication and division, I will leave them as an exercise after the class.  |
| Summary |  |

### Exercise

- Complete multiplication and division
- What would happen if you try to convert a string that does not represent an integer, e.g. “abc”
- Can you use variables to store the sum, difference, product and quotient and use them in “print”
-